# Getting bash

You may or may not be using _bash_ right now. 
Your system administrator probably set your account up with whatever shell he uses as the "standard" on the system.
You may not even have been aware that there is more than one shell available.

Yet it's easy for you to determine which shell you are using. 
Log in to your system and type **echo $SHELL** at the prompt. 
You will see a response containing **sh** , **csh** , **ksh** , or **bash** ; these denote the Bourne, C, Korn, and _bash_ shells, respectively. (There's also a chance that you're using another shell such as _tcsh_ .)

If you aren't using _bash_ and you want to, then you first need to find out if it exists on your system. Just type **bash**. 
If you get a new prompt consisting of some information followed by a dollar sign (e.g., **bash3 $** ), then all is well; type **exit** to go back to your normal shell.

If you get a "not found" message, your system may not have it. 
Ask your system administrator or another knowledgeable user; there's a chance that you might have some version of _bash_ installed on the system in a place (directory) that is not normally accessible to you. 
If not, readChapter 11to find out how you can obtain a version of _bash_.


Once you know you have _bash_ on your system, you can invoke it from whatever other shell you use by typing **bash** as above.
However, it's much better to install it as your _login shell_ , i.e., the shell that you get automatically whenever you log in.
You may be able to do the installation by yourself. 
Here are instructions that are designed to work on the widest variety of UNIX systems.
If something doesn't work (e.g., you type in a command and get a "not found" error message or a blank line as the response), you'll have to abort the process and see your system administrator. 
Alternatively, turn to Chapter 12 where we demonstrate a less straightforward way of replacing your current shell.

You need to find out where _bash_ is on your system, i.e., in which directory it's installed. 
You might be able to find the location by typing **whereis bash** (especially if you are using the C shell); if that doesn't work, try **whence bash** , **which bash** , or this complex command:[3]

```
grep bash /etc/passwd | awk -F: '{print $7}' | sort -u
```

You should see a response that looks like _/bin/bash_ or _/usr/local/bin/bash_.

To install _bash_ as your login shell, type **chsh** _bash-name_ , where _bash-name_ is the response you got to your **whereis** command (or whatever worked). 
For example:

```
% chsh /usr/local/bin/bash
```

You'll either get an error message saying that the shell is invalid, or you'll be prompted for your password.[4]
Type in your password, then log out and log back in again to start using _bash_.[3]
Make sure you use the correct quotation mark in this command: ' rather than _`_. [4]
For system security reasons, only certain programs are allowed to be installed as login shells.

