# Interactive Shell Use

When you use the shell interactively, you engage in a login session that begins when you log in and ends when you type **exit** or **logout** or press CTRL-D.[5]
During a login session, you type in _command lines_ to the shell;
these are lines of text ending in RETURN that you type in to your terminal or workstation.

By default, the shell prompts you for each command with an information string followed by a dollar sign, though as you will see in Chapter 3, the entire prompt can be changed.

## Commands, Arguments, and Options

Shell command lines consist of one or more words, which are separated on a command line by blanks or TABs. 
The first word on the line is the _command_. 
The rest (if any) are _arguments_ (also called _parameters_ ) to the command, which are names of things on which the command will act.

For example, the command line **lp myfile** consists of the command _lp_ (print a file) and the single argument **myfile**.


_lp_ treats **myfile** as the name of a file to print. 
Arguments are often names of files, but not necessarily: in the command line **mail cam** , the _mail_ program treats **cam** as the username to which a message will be sent.

An _option_ is a special type of argument that gives the command specific information on what it is supposed to do. 
Options usually consist of a dash followed by a letter; we say "usually" because this is a convention rather than a hard-and-fast rule. 
The command **lp -h myfile** contains the option **-h** , which tells _lp_ not to print the "banner page" before it prints the file.

Sometimes options take their own arguments. 
For example, **lp -d lp1 -h myfile** has two options and one argument. 
The first option is **-d lp1** , which means "Send the output to the printer (destination) called **lp1** ." 
The second option and argument are the same as in the previous example.[5]

The shell can be set up so that it ignores a single CTRL-D to end the session. We recommend doing this, because CTRL-D is too easy to type by accident.
See the section on options inChapter 3for further details.
