

# Files

Although arguments to commands aren't always files, files are the most important types of "things" on any UNIX system. 
A file can contain any kind of information, and indeed there are different types of files. 
Three types are by far the most important:

**_Regular files_**

```
Also called text files; these contain readable characters. 
For example, this book was created from several regular files that contain the text of the book plus human-readable formatting instructions to the troff word processor.
```

**_Executable files_**

```
Also called programs; these are invoked as commands. 
Some can't be read by humans; others—the shell scripts that we'll examine in this book—are just special text files. 
The shell itself is a (non-human-readable) executable file called bash.
```

**_Directories_**

```
These are like folders that contain other files—possibly other directories (called subdirectories ).
```

## Directories

Let's review the most important concepts about directories. 
The fact that directories can contain other directories leads to a hierarchical structure, more popularly known as a _tree_ , for all files on a UNIX system.

Figure 1-1 shows part of a typical directory tree; rectangles are directories and ovals are regular files.

```
Figure 1-2. A tree of directories and files
```

The top of the tree is a directory called _root_ that has no name on the system.[6] 
All files can be named by expressing their location on the system relative to _root_ ; such names are built by listing all of the directory names (in order from _root_ ), separated by slashes ( **/** ), followed by the file's name. 
This way of naming files is called a _full_ (or _absolute_ ) _pathname_.

For example, say there is a file called _aaiw_ that is in the directory _book_ , which is in the directory _cam_ , which is in the directory _home_ , which is in the root directory. This file's full pathname is _/home/cam/book/aaiw_.

### The working directory

Of course, it's annoying to have to use full pathnames whenever you need to specify a file. 
So there is also the concept of the working directory (sometimes called the current directory), which is the directory you are "in" at any given time. 
If you give a pathname with no leading slash, then the location of the file is worked out relative to the working directory. 
Such pathnames are called _relative_ pathnames; you'll use them much more often than full pathnames.

When you log in to the system, your working directory is initially set to a special directory called your _home_ (or _login_ ) directory.
System administrators often set up the system so that everyone's home directory name is the same as their login name, and all home directories are contained in a common directory under _root_.

For example, _/home/cam_ is a typical home directory. 
If this is your working directory and you give the command **lp memo** , then the system looks for the file _memo_ in _/home/cam_. 
If you have a directory called _hatter_ in your home directory, and it contains the file _teatime_ , then you can print it with the command **lp hatter/teatime**.


### Tilde notation

As you can well imagine, home directories occur often in pathnames. 
Although many systems are organized so that all home directories have a common parent (such as _/home_ or _/users_ ), you should not rely on that being the case, nor should you even have to know the absolute pathname of someone's home directory.

Therefore, _bash_ has a way of abbreviating home directories: just precede the name of the user with a tilde ( **~** ). 
For example, you could refer to the file _story_ in user **alice** 's home directory as _~alice/story_. 
This is an absolute pathname, so it doesn't matter what your working directory is when you use it. 
If **alice** 's home directory has a subdirectory called _adventure_ and the file is in there instead, you can use _~alice/adventure/story_ as its name.

Even more convenient, a tilde by itself refers to your own home directory. 
You can refer to a file called _notes_ in your home directory as _~/notes_ (note the difference between that and _~notes_ , which the shell would try to interpret as user _notes_ 's home directory). 
If _notes_ is in your _adventure_ subdirectory, then you can call it _~/adventure/notes_. This notation is handiest when your working directory is not in your home directory tree, e.g., when it's some system directory like _/tmp_.


### Changing working directories

If you want to change your working directory, use the command **cd**. If you don't remember your working directory, the command **pwd** tells the shell to print it.

**cd** takes as an argument the name of the directory you want to become your working directory. 
It can be relative to your current directory, it can contain a tilde, or it can be absolute (starting with a slash). 
If you omit the argument, **cd** changes to your home directory (i.e., it's the same as **cd ~** ).

Table 1-1 gives some sample **cd** commands. 
Each command assumes that your working directory is _/home/ cam_ just before the command is executed, and that your directory structure looks likeFigure 1-1.

**Table 1-1. Sample cd commands**

```
Command New working directory
```

```
cd book /home/cam/book
```

```
cd book/wonderland /home/cam/book/wonderland
```

```
Command New working directory
```
```
cd ~/book/wonderland /home/cam/book/wonderland
```
```
cd /usr/lib /usr/lib
```
```
cd .. /home
```
```
cd ../gryphon /home/gryphon
```
```
cd ~gryphon /home/gryphon
```
The first four are straightforward. 
The next two use a special directory called**.**. (two dots), which means "parent of this directory." 
Every directory has one of these; it's a universal way to get to the directory above the current one in the hierarchy—which is called the parent directory.[7]

Another feature of _bash_ 's **cd** command is the form **cd -** , which changes to whatever directory you were in before the current one. 
For example, if you start out in _/usr/lib_ , type **cd** without an argument to go to your home directory, and then type **cd -** , you will be back in _/usr/lib_.


## Filenames, Wildcards, and Pathname Expansion

Sometimes you need to run a command on more than one file at a time. 
The most common example of such a command is _ls_ , which lists information about files. 
In its simplest form, without options or arguments, it lists the names of all files in the working directory except special hidden files, whose names begin with a dot (.).

If you give _ls_ filename arguments, it will list those files—which is sort of silly: if your current directory has the files _duchess_ and _queen_ in it and you type **ls duchess
queen** , the system will simply print those filenames.

Actually, _ls_ is more often used with options that tell it to list information about the files, like the **-l** (long) option, which tells _ls_ to list the file's owner, size, time of last modification, and other information, or **-a** (all), which also lists the hidden files described above. 
But sometimes you want to verify the existence of a certain group of files without having to know all of their names; for example, if you use a text editor, you might want to see which files in your current directory have names that end in _.txt_.

Filenames are so important in UNIX that the shell provides a built-in way to specify the pattern of a set of filenames without having to know all of the names themselves. 
You can use special characters, called _wildcards_ , in filenames to turn them into patterns.
Table 1-2 lists the basic wildcards.

**Table 1-2. Basic wildcards**

```
Wildcard Matches
```
```
? Any single character
```
```
* Any string of characters
```
```
[ set ] Any character in set
```
```
[! set ] Any character not in set
```
The **?** wildcard matches any single character, so that if your directory contains the files _program.c_ , _program.log_ , and _program.o_ , then the expression **program**.**?** matches _program.c_ and _program.o_ but not _program.log_.
The asterisk ( ***** ) is more powerful and far more widely used; it matches any string of characters. 
The expression **program**. ***** will match all three files in the previous paragraph; text editor users can use the expression ***.txt** to match their input files.[8]

Table 1-3 should help demonstrate how the asterisk works. 
Assume that you have the files _bob_ , _darlene_ , _dave_ , _ed_ , _frank_ , and _fred_ in your working directory.

**Table 1-3. Using the * wildcard**

```
Expression Yields
```
```
fr* frank fred
```
```
* ed ed fred
```
```
b* bob
```
```
* e * darlene dave ed fred
```
```
* r * darlene frank fred
```
```
* bob darlene dave ed frank fred
```

```
Expression Yields
```
```
d * e darlene dave
```
```
g* g*
```
Notice that ***** can stand for nothing: both ***ed** and ***e*** match _ed_. 
Also notice that the last example shows what the shell does if it can't match anything: it just leaves the string with the wildcard untouched.

The remaining wildcard is the _set_ construct. A set is a list of characters (e.g., abc), an inclusive range (e.g., a-z), or some combination of the two. 
If you want the dash character to be part of a list, just list it first or last.
Table 1-4should explain things more clearly.

**Table 1-4. Using the set construct wildcards**

```
Expression Matches
```
```
[abc] a, b, or c
```

**Expression Matches**

[.,;] Period, comma, or semicolon

[-_] Dash or underscore

[a-c] a, b, or c

[a-z] All lowercase letters

[!0-9] All non-digits

[0-9!] All digits and exclamation point

[a-zA-Z] All lower- and uppercase letters

[a-zA-Z0-9_-] All letters, all digits, underscore, and dash In the original wildcard example, **program.[co]** and **program.[a-z]** both match _program.c_ and _program.o_ , but not _program.log_.

An exclamation point after the left bracket lets you "negate" a set. 
For example, **[!.;]** matches any character except period and semicolon; **[!a-zA-Z]** matches any character that isn't a letter. 
To match**!** itself, place it after the first character in the set, or precede it with a backslash, as in **[\!]**.

The range notation is handy, but you shouldn't make too many assumptions about what characters are included in a range. 
It's safe to use a range for uppercase letters, lowercase letters, digits, or any subranges thereof (e.g., **[f-q]** , **[2-6]** ).
Don't use ranges on punctuation characters or mixed-case letters: e.g., **[a-Z]** and **[A-z]** should not be trusted to include all of the letters and nothing more. The problem is that such ranges are not entirely portable
between different types of computers.[9]

The process of matching expressions containing
wildcards to filenames is called _wildcard expansion_ or
_globbing_. This is just one of several steps the shell takes
when reading and processing a command line; another
that we have already seen is tilde expansion, where tildes
are replaced with home directories where applicable.
We'll see others in later chapters, and the full details of
the process are enumerated inChapter 7.


However, it's important to be aware that the commands
that you run only see the results of wildcard expansion.
That is, they just see a list of arguments, and they have no
knowledge of how those arguments came into being. For
example, if you type **ls fr*** and your files are as on the
previous page, then the shell expands the command line
to **ls fred frank** and invokes the command _ls_ with
arguments **fred** and **frank**. If you type **ls g*** , then
(because there is no match) _ls_ will be given the literal
string **g*** and will complain with the error message, **g*:
No such file or directory** .[10]

Here is an example that should help make things clearer.
Suppose you are a C programmer. This means that you
deal with files whose names end in _.c_ (programs, also
known as source files), _.h_ (header files for programs), and
_.o_ (object code files that aren't human-readable), as well
as other files. Let's say you want to list all source, object,
and header files in your working directory. The command
**ls *.[cho]** does the trick. The shell expands ***.[cho]** to all
files whose names end in a period followed by a **c** , **h** , or **o**
and passes the resulting list to _ls_ as arguments. In other
words, _ls_ will see the filenames just as if they were all
typed in individually—but notice that we required no
knowledge of the actual filenames whatsoever! We let the
wildcards do the work.

The wildcard examples that we have seen so far are
actually part of a more general concept called _pathname
expansion_. Just as it is possible to use wildcards in the
current directory, they can also be used as part of a


pathname. For example, if you wanted to list all of the
files in the directories _/usr_ and _/usr2_ , you could type **ls
/usr***. If you were only interested in the files beginning
with the letters _b_ and _e_ in these directories, you could
type **ls /usr*/[be]*** to list them.


## Brace Expansion

A concept closely related to pathname expansion is brace
expansion. Whereas pathname expansion wildcards will
expand to files and directories that exist, brace expansion
expands to an arbitrary string of a given form: an optional
_preamble_ , followed by comma-separated strings between
braces, and followed by an optional _postscript_. If you
type **echo b{ed,olt,ar}s** , you'll see the words _beds_ , _bolts_ ,
and _bars_ printed. Each instance of a string inside the
braces is combined with the preamble _b_ and the postscript
_s_. Notice that these are not filenames—the strings
produced are independent of filenames. It is also possible
to nest the braces, as in **b{ar{d,n,k},ed}s**. This will result
in the expansion _bards_ , _barns_ , _barks_ , and _beds_.

You can also use a slightly different type of brace
expansion for creating a sequence of letters or numbers. If
you type **echo {2..5}** you'll see this expands to _2 3 4 5_.
Typing **echo {d..h}** results in the expansion _d e f g h_ .[11]

Brace expansion can also be used with wildcard
expansions. In the example from the previous section
where we listed the source, object, and header files in the
working directory, we could have used **ls *.{c,h,o}** .[12]


[6]Most UNIX tutorials say that _root_ has the name **/**. We

stand by this alternative explanation because it is more
logically consistent with the rest of the UNIX filename
conventions.

[7]Each directory also has the special directory. (single

dot), which just means "this directory." Thus, **cd**.
effectively does nothing. Both. and**.**. are actually special
hidden files in each directory that point to the directory
itself and to its parent directory, respectively. _root_ is its
own parent.

[8]MS-DOS and VAX/VMS users should note that there

is _nothing special_ about the dot (.) in UNIX filenames
(aside from the leading dot, which "hides" the file); it's
just another character. For example, **ls *** lists all files in
the current directory; you don't need ***.*** as you do on
other systems. Indeed, **ls *.*** won't list all the files—only
those that have at least one dot in the middle of the name.

[9]Specifically, ranges depend on the character encoding

scheme your computer uses (normally ASCII, but IBM
mainframes use EBCDIC) and the character set used by
the current locale (ranges in languages other than English
may not give expected results).

[10] This is different from the C shell's wildcard

mechanism, which prints an error message and doesn't
execute the command at all.


[11]This form of brace expansion is not available in _bash_

prior to Version 3.0.

[12]This differs slightly from C shell brace expansion.

_bash_ requires at least one unquoted comma to perform an
expansion; otherwise, the word is left unchanged, e.g.,
**b{o}lt** remains as **b{o}lt**.
