# Scope of This Book

In this book you will learn about _bash_ , which is one of the most recent and powerful of the major UNIX shells.
There are two ways to use _bash_ : as a user interface and as a programming environment.

This chapter and the next cover interactive use. These two chapters should give you enough background to use the shell confidently and productively for most of your everyday tasks.

After you have been using the shell for a while, you will undoubtedly find certain characteristics of your environment (the shell's "look and feel") that you would like to change, and tasks that you would like to automate. Chapter 3shows several ways of doing this.

Chapter 3 also prepares you for shell programming, the bulk of which is covered in Chapter 4 through Chapter 6. 
You need not have any programming experience to understand these chapters and learn shell programming.
Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 give more complete descriptions of the shell's I/O and process-handling capabilities, 
while Chapter 9 discusses various techniques for debugging shell programs.

You'll learn a lot about _bash_ in this book; 
you'll also learn about UNIX utilities and the way the UNIX operating system works in general. 
It's possible to become a virtuoso shell programmer without any previous programming experience. 
At the same time, we've carefully avoided going into excessive detail about UNIX internals. 
We maintain that you shouldn't have to be an internals expert to use and program the shell effectively, and we won't dwell on the few shell features that are intended specifically for low-level systems programmers.
