# Chapter 1. bash Basics

Since the early 1970s, when it was first created, the
UNIX operating system has become more and more
popular. During this time it has branched out into
different versions, and taken on such names as Ultrix,
AIX, Xenix, SunOS, and Linux. Starting on
minicomputers and mainframes, it has moved onto
desktop workstations and even personal computers used
at work and home. No longer a system used only by
academics and computing wizards at universities and
research centers, UNIX is used in many businesses,
schools, and homes. As time goes on, more people will
come into contact with UNIX.

You may have used UNIX at your school, office, or home
to run your applications, print documents, and read your
electronic mail. But have you ever thought about the
process that happens when you type a command and hit
RETURN?

Several layers of events take place whenever you enter a
command, but we're going to consider only the top layer,
known as the _shell_. Generically speaking, a shell is any
user interface to the UNIX operating system, i.e., any
program that takes input from the user, translates it into
instructions that the operating system can understand, and
conveys the operating system's output back to the user.


Figure 1-1shows the relationship between user, shell, and
operating system.

```
Figure 1-1. The shell is a layer around the
UNIX operating system
```
There are various types of user interfaces. _bash_ belongs to
the most common category, known as character-based
user interfaces. These interfaces accept lines of textual
commands that the user types in; they usually produce
text-based output. Other types of interfaces include the
increasingly common _graphical user interfaces_ (GUI),
which add the ability to display arbitrary graphics (not
just typewriter characters) and to accept input from a
mouse or other pointing device, touch-screen interfaces
(such as those on some bank teller machines), and so on.



# Input and Output

The software field—really, any scientific field—tends to
advance most quickly and impressively on those few
occasions when someone (i.e., not a committee) comes up
with an idea that is small in concept yet enormous in its
implications. The standard input and output scheme of
UNIX has to be on the short list of such ideas, along with
such classic innovations as the LISP language, the
relational data model, and object-oriented programming.

The UNIX I/O scheme is based on two dazzlingly simple
ideas. First, UNIX file I/O takes the form of arbitrarily
long sequences of characters (bytes). In contrast, file
systems of older vintage have more complicated I/O
schemes (e.g., "block," "record," "card image," etc.).
Second, everything on the system that produces or
accepts data is treated as a file; this includes hardware
devices like disk drives and terminals. Older systems
treated every device differently. Both of these ideas have
made systems programmers' lives much more pleasant.

## Standard I/O

By convention, each UNIX program has a single way of
accepting input called _standard input_ , a single way of
producing output called _standard output_ , and a single


way of producing error messages called _standard error
output_ , usually shortened to _standard error_. Of course, a
program can have other input and output sources as well,
as we will see inChapter 7.

Standard I/O was the first scheme of its kind that was
designed specifically for interactive users at terminals,
rather than the older batch style of use that usually
involved decks of punch-cards. Since the UNIX shell
provides the user interface, it should come as no surprise
that standard I/O was designed to fit in very neatly with
the shell.

All shells handle standard I/O in basically the same way.
Each program that you invoke has all three standard I/O
channels set to your terminal or workstation, so that
standard input is your keyboard, and standard output and
error are your screen or window. For example, the _mail_
utility prints messages to you on the standard output, and
when you use it to send messages to other users, it
accepts your input on the standard input. This means that
you view messages on your screen and type new ones in
on your keyboard.

When necessary, you can redirect input and output to
come from or go to a file instead. If you want to send the
contents of a pre-existing file to someone as mail, you
redirect _mail_ 's standard input so that it reads from that file
instead of your keyboard.


You can also hook programs together in a _pipeline_ , in
which the standard output of one program feeds directly
into the standard input of another; for example, you could
feed _mail_ output directly to the _lp_ program so that
messages are printed instead of shown on the screen.

This makes it possible to use UNIX utilities as building
blocks for bigger programs. Many UNIX utility programs
are meant to be used in this way: they each perform a
specific type of filtering operation on input text. Although
this isn't a textbook on UNIX utilities, they are essential
to productive shell use. The more popular filtering
utilities are listed inTable 1-5.

**Table 1-5. Popular UNIX data filtering utilities**

```
Utility Purpose
```
```
cat Copy input to output
```
```
grep Search for strings in the input
```
```
sort Sort lines in the input
```
```
cut Extract columns from input
```

```
Utility Purpose
```
```
sed Perform editing operations on input
```
```
tr
Translate characters in the input to other
characters
```
You may have used some of these before and noticed that
they take names of input files as arguments and produce
output on standard output. You may not know, however,
that all of them (and most other UNIX utilities) accept
input from standard input if you omit the argument.[13]

For example, the most basic utility is _cat_ , which simply
copies its input to its output. If you type **cat** with a
filename argument, it will print out the contents of that
file on your screen. But if you invoke it with no
arguments, it will expect standard input and copy it to
standard output. Try it: _cat_ will wait for you to type a line
of text; when you type RETURN, _cat_ will repeat the text
back to you. To stop the process, hit CTRL-D at the
beginning of a line. You will see **^D** when you type
CTRL-D. Here's what this should look like:

```
$ cat
Here is a line of text.
Here is a line of text.
```

**This is another line of text.**
This is another line of text.
**^D**
$


## I/O Redirection

_cat_ is short for "catenate," i.e., link together. It accepts
multiple filename arguments and copies them to the
standard output. But let's pretend, for now, that _cat_ and
other utilities don't accept filename arguments and accept
only standard input. As we said above, the shell lets you
redirect standard input so that it comes from a file. The
notation _command_ **<** _filename_ does this; it sets things up
so that _command_ takes standard input from a file instead
of from a terminal.

For example, if you have a file called _cheshire_ that
contains some text, then **cat < cheshire** will print
_cheshire_ 's contents out onto your terminal. **sort <
cheshire** will sort the lines in the _cheshire_ file and print
the result on your terminal (remember: we're pretending
that these utilities don't take filename arguments).

Similarly, _command_ **>** _filename_ causes the _command_ 's
standard output to be redirected to the named file. The
classic "canonical" example of this is **date > now** : the
_date_ command prints the current date and time on the
standard output; the previous command saves it in a file
called _now_.

Input and output redirectors can be combined. For
example: the _cp_ command is normally used to copy files;


if for some reason it didn't exist or was broken, you could
use _cat_ in this way:

```
$ cat <
file1
>
file2
```
This would be similar to **cp file1 file2**.


## Pipelines

It is also possible to redirect the output of a command
into the standard input of another command instead of a
file. The construct that does this is called the pipe, notated
as **|**. A command line that includes two or more
commands connected with pipes is called a pipeline.

Pipes are very often used with the _more_ command, which
works just like _cat_ except that it prints its output screen
by screen, pausing for the user to type SPACE (next
screen), RETURN (next line), or other commands. If
you're in a directory with a large number of files and you
want to see details about them, **ls -l | more** will give you a
detailed listing a screen at a time.

Pipelines can get very complex, and they can also be
combined with other I/O directors. To see a sorted listing
of the file _cheshire_ a screen at a time, type **sort <
cheshire | more**. To print it instead of viewing it on your
terminal, type **sort < cheshire | lp**.

Here's a more complicated example. The file _/etc/passwd_
stores information about users' accounts on a UNIX
system. Each line in the file contains a user's login name,
user ID number, encrypted password, home directory,
login shell, and other information. The first field of each


line is the login name; fields are separated by colons (:).
A sample line might look like this:

```
cam:LM1c7GhNesD4GhF3iEHrH4FeCKB/:501:100:Cameron Newham:/home/cam:/bin/bash
```
To get a sorted listing of all users on the system, type:

```
$ cut -d: -f1 < /etc/passwd | sort
```
(Actually, you can omit the **<** , since _cut_ accepts input
filename arguments.) The _cut_ command extracts the first
field ( **-f1** ), where fields are separated by colons ( **-d** :),
from the input. The entire pipeline will print a list that
looks like this:

```
adm
bin
cam
daemon
davidqc
ftp
games
gonzo
...
```
If you want to send the list directly to the printer (instead
of your screen), you can extend the pipeline like this:

```
$ cut -d: -f1 < /etc/passwd | sort | lp
```
Now you should see how I/O directors and pipelines
support the UNIX building block philosophy. The
notation is extremely terse and powerful. Just as
important, the pipe concept eliminates the need for messy


temporary files to store command output before it is fed
into other commands.

For example, to do the same sort of thing as the above
command line on other operating systems (assuming that
equivalent utilities are available...), you need three
commands. On DEC's VAX/VMS system, they might
look like this:

```
$ cut [etc]passwd /d=":" /f=1 /out=temp1
$ sort temp1 /out=temp2
$ print temp2
$ delete temp1 temp2
```
After sufficient practice, you will find yourself routinely
typing in powerful command pipelines that do in one line
what it would take several commands (and temporary
files) in other operating systems to accomplish.

[13]If a particular UNIX utility doesn't accept standard

input when you leave out the filename argument, try
using a dash ( **-** ) as the argument. Some UNIX systems
provide standard input as a file, so you could try
providing the file _/dev/stdin_ as the input file argument.


# Background Jobs

Pipes are actually a special case of a more general
feature: doing more than one thing at a time. This is a
capability that many other commercial operating systems
don't have, because of the rigid limits that they tend to
impose upon users. UNIX, on the other hand, was
developed in a research lab and meant for internal use, so
it does relatively little to impose limits on the resources
available to users on a computer—as usual, leaning
towards uncluttered simplicity rather than
overcomplexity.

"Doing more than one thing at a time" means running
more than one program at the same time. You do this
when you invoke a pipeline; you can also do it by logging
on to a UNIX system as many times simultaneously as
you wish. (If you try that on an IBM's VM/CMS system,
for example, you will get an obnoxious "already logged
in" message.)

The shell also lets you run more than one command at a
time during a single login session. Normally, when you
type a command and hit RETURN, the shell will let the
command have control of your terminal until it is done;
you can't type in further commands until the first one is
done. But if you want to run a command that does not
require user input and you want to do other things while


the command is running, put an ampersand (&) after the
command.

This is called running the command in the background,
and a command that runs in this way is called a
background job; by contrast, a job run the normal way is
called a foreground job. When you start a background
job, you get your shell prompt back immediately,
enabling you to enter other commands.

The most obvious use for background jobs is programs
that take a long time to run, such as _sort_ or _uncompress_
on large files. For example, assume you just got an
enormous compressed file loaded into your directory
from magnetic tape.[14]Let's say the file is _gcc.tar.Z_ ,
which is a compressed archive file that contains well over
10 MB of source code files.

Type **uncompress gcc.tar &** (you can omit the .Z), and
the system will start a job in the background that
uncompresses the data "in place" and ends up with the
file _gcc.tar_. Right after you type the command, you will
see a line like this:

```
[1] 175
```
followed by your shell prompt, meaning that you can
enter other commands. Those numbers give you ways of
referring to your background job; Chapter 8 explains
them in detail.


You can check on background jobs with the command
**jobs**. For each background job, **jobs** prints a line similar
to the above but with an indication of the job's status:

```
[1]+ Running uncompress gcc.tar &
```
When the job finishes, you will see a message like this
right before your shell prompt:

```
[1]+ Done uncompress gcc.tar
```
The message changes if your background job terminated
with an error; again, seeChapter 8for details.

## Background I/O

Jobs you put in the background should not do I/O to your
terminal. Just think about it for a moment and you'll
understand why.

By definition, a background job doesn't have control over
your terminal. Among other things, this means that only
the foreground process (or, if none, the shell itself) is
"listening" for input from your keyboard. If a background
job needs keyboard input, it will often just sit there doing
nothing until you do something about it (as described in
Chapter 8).

If a background job produces screen output, the output
will just appear on your screen. If you are running a job
in the foreground that produces output too, then the


output from the two jobs will be randomly (and often
annoyingly) interspersed.

If you want to run a job in the background that expects
standard input or produces standard output, you usually
want to redirect the I/O so that it comes from or goes to a
file. Programs that produce small, one-line messages
(warnings, "done" messages, etc.) are an exception to this
general rule; you may not mind if these are interspersed
with whatever other output you are seeing at a given time.

For example, the _diff_ utility examines two files, whose
names are given as arguments, and prints a summary of
their differences on the standard output. If the files are
exactly the same, _diff_ is silent. Usually, you invoke _diff_
expecting to see a few lines that are different.

_diff_ , like _sort_ and _compress_ , can take a long time to run if
the input files are very large. Suppose that you have two
large files that are called _warandpeace.txt_ and
_warandpeace.txt.old_. The command **diff
warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old** [15]reveals that
the author decided to change the name "Ivan" to
"Aleksandr" throughout the entire file—i.e., hundreds of
differences, resulting in very large amounts of output.

If you type **diff warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old
&** , then the system will spew lots and lots of output at
you, which will be difficult to stop—even with the
techniques explained inChapter 7. However, if you type:

```
$ diff warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old > txtdiff &
```

then the differences will be saved in the file _txtdiff_ for you
to examine later.


## Background Jobs and Priorities

Background jobs can save you a lot of thumb-twiddling
time. Just remember that such jobs eat up lots of system
resources like memory and the processor (CPU). Just
because you're running several jobs at once doesn't mean
that they will run faster than they would if run
sequentially—in fact, performance is usually slightly
worse.

Every job on the system is assigned a _priority_ , a number
that tells the operating system how much priority to give
the job when it doles out resources (the higher the
number, the lower the priority). Commands that you enter
from the shell, whether foreground or background jobs,
usually have the same priority. The system administrator
is able to run commands at a higher priority than normal
users.

Note that if you're on a multiuser system, running lots of
background jobs may eat up more than your fair share of
resources, and you should consider whether having your
job run as fast as possible is really more important than
being a good citizen.


Speaking of good citizenship, there is also a UNIX
command that lets you lower the priority of any job: the
aptly named _nice_. If you type **nice** _command_ , where
_command_ can be a complex shell command line with
pipes, redirectors, etc., then the command will run at a
lower priority.[16]You can control just how much lower
by giving _nice_ a numerical argument; consult the _nice_
manpage for details.[17]

[14]Compressed files are created by the _compress_ utility,

which packs files into smaller amounts of space; they
have names of the form _filename.Z_ , where _filename_ is the
name of the original uncompressed file.

[15]You could use **diff warandpeace*** as a shorthand to

save typing—as long as there are no other files with
names of that form. Remember that _diff_ doesn't see the
arguments until after the shell has expanded the
wildcards. Many people overlook this use of wildcards.

[16]Complex commands following _nice_ should be quoted.

[17]If you are a system administrator logged in as **root** ,

then you can also use _nice_ to raise a job's priority.


# Special Characters and Quoting

The characters **<** , **>** , **|** , and **&** are four examples of _special
characters_ that have particular meanings to the shell. The
wildcards we saw earlier in this chapter ( ***** ,**?** , and **[** ... **]** )
are also special characters.

Table 1-6 gives the meanings of all special characters
within shell command lines only. Other characters have
special meanings in specific situations, such as the
regular expressions and string-handling operators that
we'll see inChapter 3andChapter 4.

**Table 1-6. Special characters**

```
Character Meaning
See
chapter
```
```
~ Home directory Chapter 1
```
#### `

```
Command substitution
(archaic)
Chapter 4
```

**Character Meaning**

```
See
chapter
```
**#** Comment Chapter 4

**$** Variable expression Chapter 3

**&** Background job Chapter 1

***** String wildcard Chapter 1

**(** Start subshell Chapter 8

**)** End subshell Chapter 8

**\** Quote next character Chapter 1

**|** Pipe Chapter 1

**[** Start character-set wildcard Chapter 1


**Character Meaning**

```
See
chapter
```
**]** End character-set wildcard Chapter 1

**{** Start command block Chapter 7

**}** End command block Chapter 7

**;** Shell command separator Chapter 3

` Strong quote Chapter 1

<"> Weak quote Chapter 1

**<** Input redirect Chapter 1

**>** Output redirect Chapter 1

**/** Pathname directory separator Chapter 1


```
Character Meaning
```
```
See
chapter
```
```
? Single-character wildcard Chapter 1
```
```
! Pipeline logical NOT Chapter 5
```
## Quoting

Sometimes you will want to use special characters
literally, i.e., without their special meanings. This is
called _quoting_. If you surround a string of characters with
single quotation marks (or _quotes_ ), you strip all
characters within the quotes of any special meaning they
might have.

The most obvious situation where you might need to
quote a string is with the **echo** command, which just takes
its arguments and prints them to the standard output.
What is the point of this? As you will see in later
chapters, the shell does quite a bit of processing on
command lines—most of which involves some of the
special characters listed inTable 1-6. **echo** is a way of
making the result of that processing available on the
standard output.


What if we want to print the string **2 * 3 > 5 is a valid
inequality**? Suppose you type this:

```
$ echo 2 * 3 > 5 is a valid inequality.
```
You would get your shell prompt back, as if nothing
happened! But then there would be a new file, with the
name _5_ , containing "2", the names of all files in your
current directory, and then the string **3 is a valid
inequality**. Make sure you understand why.[18]

However, if you type:

```
$ echo '2 * 3 > 5 is a valid inequality.'
```
the result is the string, taken literally. You needn't quote
the entire line, just the portion containing special
characters (or characters you think _might_ be special, if
you just want to be sure):

```
$ echo '2 * 3 > 5' is a valid inequality.
```
This has exactly the same result.

Notice that Table 1-6 lists double quotes (") as weak
quotes. A string in double quotes is subjected to _some_ of
the steps the shell takes to process command lines, but
not all. (In other words, it treats only some special
characters as special.) You'll see in later chapters why
double quotes are sometimes preferable; Chapter 7
contains the most comprehensive explanation of the
shell's rules for quoting and other aspects of


command-line processing. For now, though, you should
stick to single quotes.


## Backslash-Escaping

Another way to change the meaning of a character is to
precede it with a backslash (\). This is called
_backslash-escaping_ the character. In most cases, when
you backslash-escape a character, you quote it. For
example:

```
$ echo 2 \* 3 \> 5 is a valid inequality.
```
will produce the same results as if you surrounded the
string with single quotes. To use a literal backslash, just
surround it with quotes (' **\** ') or, even better,
backslash-escape it ( **\\** ).

Here is a more practical example of quoting special
characters. A few UNIX commands take arguments that
often include wildcard characters, which need to be
escaped so the shell doesn't process them first. The most
common such command is _find_ , which searches for files
throughout entire directory trees.

To use _find_ , you supply the root of the tree you want to
search and arguments that describe the characteristics of
the file(s) you want to find. For example, the command
**find**. _-name string_ searches the directory tree whose root
is your current directory for files whose names match the
string. (Other arguments allow you to search by the file's
size, owner, permissions, date of last access, etc.)


You can use wildcards in the string, but you must quote
them, so that the _find_ command itself can match them
against names of files in each directory it searches. The
command **find. -name `*.c** ' will match all files whose
names end in _.c_ anywhere in your current directory,
subdirectories, sub-subdirectories, etc.


## Quoting Quotation Marks

You can also use a backslash to include double quotes
within a quoted string. For example:

```
$ echo \"2 \* 3 \> 5\" is a valid inequality.
```
produces the following output:

```
"2 * 3 > 5" is a valid inequality.
```
However, this won't work with single quotes inside
quoted expressions. For example, **echo** `Hatter\'s tea
party' will not give you **Hatter's tea party**. You can get
around this limitation in various ways. First, try
eliminating the quotes:

```
$ echo Hatter\'s tea party
```
If no other characters are special (as is the case here), this
works. Otherwise, you can use the following command:

```
$ echo 'Hatter'\''s tea party'
```
That is, ` **\** '' (i.e., single quote, backslash, single quote,
single quote) acts like a single quote within a quoted
string. Why? The first ' in ` **\** '' ends the quoted string we
started with **(** ` **Hatter)** , the **\** ' inserts a literal single quote,
and the next ' starts another quoted string that ends with
the word "party". If you understand this, then you will


have no trouble resolving the other bewildering issues
that arise from the shell's often cryptic syntax.


## Continuing Lines

A related issue is how to continue the text of a command
beyond a single line on your terminal or workstation
window. The answer is conceptually simple: just quote
the RETURN key. After all, RETURN is really just
another character.

You can do this in two ways: by ending a line with a
backslash, or by not closing a quote mark (i.e., by
including RETURN in a quoted string). If you use the
backslash, there must be nothing between it and the end
of the line—not even spaces or TABs.

Whether you use a backslash or a single quote, you are
telling the shell to ignore the special meaning of the
RETURN character. After you press RETURN, the shell
understands that you haven't finished your command line
(i.e., since you haven't typed a "real" RETURN), so it
responds with a secondary prompt, which is **>** by default,
and waits for you to finish the line. You can continue a
line as many times as you wish.

For example, if you want the shell to print the first
sentence of of Lewis Carroll's _Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland_ , you can type this:


```
$ echo The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some \
> time in silence: at last Caterpillar took the hookah out of its \
> mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
```
Or you can do it this way:

```
$ echo 'The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some
> time in silence: at last Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
> mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.'
```

## Control Keys

Control keys—those that you type by holding down the
CONTROL (or CTRL) key and hitting another key—are
another type of special character. These normally don't
print anything on your screen, but the operating system
interprets a few of them as special commands. You
already know one of them: RETURN is actually the same
as CTRL-M (try it and see). You have probably also used
the BACKSPACE or DEL key to erase typos on your
command line.

Actually, many control keys have functions that don't
really concern you—yet you should know about them for
future reference and in case you type them by accident.

Perhaps the most difficult thing about control keys is that
they can differ from system to system. The usual
arrangement is shown inTable 1-7, which lists the control
keys that all major modern versions of UNIX support.
Note that DEL and CTRL-**?** are the same character.

You can use the **stty** command to find out what your
settings are and change them if you wish; seeChapter 8
for details. If the version of UNIX on your system is one
of those that derive from BSD (such as SunOS and OS
X), type **stty all** to see your control-key settings; you will
see something like this:


```
erase kill werase rprnt flush lnext susp intr quit stop eof
^? ^U ^W ^R ^O ^V ^Z/^Y ^C ^\ ^S/^Q ^D
```
**Table 1-7. Control keys**

```
Control
key
```
```
stty
name
Function description
```
```
CTRL-C intr Stop current command
```
```
CTRL-D eof End of input
```
```
CTRL-\ quit
Stop current command if
CTRL-C doesn't work
```
```
CTRL-S stop Halt output to screen
```
```
CTRL-Q Restart output to screen
```
```
DEL or
CTRL-?
erase Erase last character
```

```
Control
key
```
```
stty
name
Function description
```
```
CTRL-U kill Erase entire command line
```
```
CTRL-Z susp
Suspend current command (see
Chapter 8)
```
The _^X_ notation stands for CTRL- _X_. If your UNIX
version derives from System III or System V (this
includes AIX, HP/UX, SCO, Linux, and Xenix), type **stty
-a**.

The resulting output will include this information:

```
intr = ^c; quit = ^|; erase = DEL; kill = ^u; eof = ^d; eol = ^`;
swtch = ^`; susp = ^z; dsusp <undef>;
```
The control key you will probably use most often is
CTRL-C, sometimes called the _interrupt_ key. This
stops—or tries to stop—the command that is currently
running. You will want to use this when you enter a
command and find that it's taking too long, you gave it
the wrong arguments, you change your mind about
wanting to run it, or whatever.


Sometimes CTRL-C doesn't work; in that case, if you
really want to stop a job, try CTRL-\. But don't just type
CTRL-\; always try CTRL-C first! Chapter 8 explains
why in detail. For now, suffice it to say that CTRL-C
gives the running job more of a chance to clean up before
exiting, so that files and other resources are not left in
funny states.

We've already seen an example of CTRL-D. When you
are running a command that accepts standard input from
your keyboard, CTRL-D tells the process that your input
is finished—as if the process were reading a file and it
reached the end of the file. _mail_ is a utility in which this
happens often. When you are typing in a message, you
end by typing CTRL-D. This tells _mail_ that your message
is complete and ready to be sent. Most utilities that accept
standard input understand CTRL-D as the end-of-input
character, though many such programs accept commands
like **q** , **quit** , **exit** , etc.

CTRL-S and CTRL-Q are called flow-control characters.
They represent an antiquated way of stopping and
restarting the flow of output from one device to another
(e.g., from the computer to your terminal) that was useful
when the speed of such output was low. They are rather
obsolete in these days of high-speed networks. In fact,
under the latter conditions, CTRL-S and CTRL-Q are
basically a nuisance. The only thing you really need to
know about them is that if your screen output becomes
"stuck," then you may have hit CTRL-S by accident.


Type CTRL-Q to restart the output; any keys you may
have hit in between will then take effect.

The final group of control characters gives you
rudimentary ways to edit your command line. DEL acts
as a backspace key (in fact, some systems use the actual
BACKSPACE or CTRL-H key as "erase" instead of
DEL); CTRL-U erases the entire line and lets you start
over. Again, these have been superseded.[19]The next
chapter will look at _bash_ 's editing modes, which are
among its most useful features and far more powerful
than the limited editing capabilities described here.

[18] This should also teach you something about the

flexibility of placing I/O redirectors anywhere on the
command line—even in places where they don't seem to
make sense.

[19]Why are so many outmoded control keys still in use?

They have nothing to do with the shell _per se_ ; instead,
they are recognized by the _tty driver_ , an old and hoary
part of the operating system's lower depths that controls
input and output to/from your terminal.


# Help

A feature in _bash_ that no other shell has is an online help
system. The **help** command gives information on
commands in _bash_. If you type **help** by itself, you'll get a
list of the built-in shell commands along with their
options.

If you provide **help** with a shell command name it will
give you a detailed description of the command:

```
$ help cd
cd: cd [-L | -P] [dir]
Change the current directory to DIR. The variable $HOME is the
default DIR. The variable $CDPATH defines the search path for
the directory containing DIR. Alternative directory names in
CDPATH are separated by a colon (:). A null directory name is
the same as the current directory, i.e. `.'. If DIR begins with
a slash (/), then $CDPATH is not used. If the directory is not
found, and the shell option `cdable_vars' is set, then try the
word as a variable name. If that variable has a value, then cd
to the value of that variable. The -P option says to use the
physical directory structure instead of following symbolic links;
the -L option forces symbolic links to be followed.
```
You can also provide **help** with a partial name, in which
case it will return details on all commands matching the
partial name. For example, **help re** will provide details on
**read** , **readonly** , and **return**. The partial name can also
include wildcards. You'll need to quote the name to
ensure that the wildcard is not expanded to a filename. So


the last example is equivalent to **help** `re*', and **help**
`re??' will only return details on **read**.

Sometimes **help** will show more than a screenful of
information and it will scroll the screen. You can use the
_more_ command to show one screenful at a time by typing
**help** _command_ **| more**.
