# Chapter 1. bash Basics

Since the early 1970s, when it was first created, the
UNIX operating system has become more and more
popular. During this time it has branched out into
different versions, and taken on such names as Ultrix,
AIX, Xenix, SunOS, and Linux. Starting on
minicomputers and mainframes, it has moved onto
desktop workstations and even personal computers used
at work and home. No longer a system used only by
academics and computing wizards at universities and
research centers, UNIX is used in many businesses,
schools, and homes. As time goes on, more people will
come into contact with UNIX.

You may have used UNIX at your school, office, or home
to run your applications, print documents, and read your
electronic mail. But have you ever thought about the
process that happens when you type a command and hit
RETURN?

Several layers of events take place whenever you enter a
command, but we're going to consider only the top layer,
known as the _shell_. Generically speaking, a shell is any
user interface to the UNIX operating system, i.e., any
program that takes input from the user, translates it into
instructions that the operating system can understand, and
conveys the operating system's output back to the user.


Figure 1-1shows the relationship between user, shell, and
operating system.

```
Figure 1-1. The shell is a layer around the
UNIX operating system
```
There are various types of user interfaces. _bash_ belongs to
the most common category, known as character-based
user interfaces. These interfaces accept lines of textual
commands that the user types in; they usually produce
text-based output. Other types of interfaces include the
increasingly common _graphical user interfaces_ (GUI),
which add the ability to display arbitrary graphics (not
just typewriter characters) and to accept input from a
mouse or other pointing device, touch-screen interfaces
(such as those on some bank teller machines), and so on.


# What Is a Shell?

The shell's job, then, is to translate the user's command
lines into operating system instructions. For example,
consider this command line:

```
sort -n phonelist > phonelist.sorted
```
This means, "Sort lines in the file _phonelist_ in numerical
order, and put the result in the file _phonelist.sorted_ ."
Here's what the shell does with this command:

1. Breaks up the line into the pieces _sort_ , _-n_ ,
    _phonelist_ , _>_ , and _phonelist.sorted_. These pieces
    are called words.
2. Determines the purpose of the words: _sort_ is a
    command, _-n_ and _phonelist_ are arguments, and _>_
    and _phonelist.sorted_ , taken together, are I/O
    instructions.
3. Sets up the I/O according to **>** phonelist.sorted
    (output to the file phone list.sorted) and some
    standard, implicit instructions.
4. Finds the command sort in a file and runs it with
    the option **-n** (numerical order) and the argument
    phonelist (input filename).


Of course, each of these steps really involves several
substeps, each of which includes a particular instruction
to the underlying operating system.

Remember that the shell itself is not UNIX—just the user
interface to it. UNIX is one of the first operating systems
to make the user interface independent of the operating
system.


# Scope of This Book

In this book you will learn about _bash_ , which is one of
the most recent and powerful of the major UNIX shells.
There are two ways to use _bash_ : as a user interface and as
a programming environment.

This chapter and the next cover interactive use. These two
chapters should give you enough background to use the
shell confidently and productively for most of your
everyday tasks.

After you have been using the shell for a while, you will
undoubtedly find certain characteristics of your
environment (the shell's "look and feel") that you would
like to change, and tasks that you would like to automate.
Chapter 3shows several ways of doing this.

Chapter 3also prepares you for shell programming, the
bulk of which is covered inChapter 4throughChapter 6.
You need not have any programming experience to
understand these chapters and learn shell programming.
Chapter 7andChapter 8give more complete descriptions
of the shell's I/O and process-handling capabilities, while
Chapter 9 discusses various techniques for debugging
shell programs.

You'll learn a lot about _bash_ in this book; you'll also learn
about UNIX utilities and the way the UNIX operating


system works in general. It's possible to become a
virtuoso shell programmer without any previous
programming experience. At the same time, we've
carefully avoided going into excessive detail about UNIX
internals. We maintain that you shouldn't have to be an
internals expert to use and program the shell effectively,
and we won't dwell on the few shell features that are
intended specifically for low-level systems programmers.


# History of UNIX Shells

The independence of the shell from the UNIX operating
system _per se_ has led to the development of dozens of
shells throughout UNIX history—although only a few
have achieved widespread use.

The first major shell was the Bourne shell (named after its
inventor, Steven Bourne); it was included in the first
popular version of UNIX, Version 7, starting in 1979.
The Bourne shell is known on the system as _sh_. Although
UNIX has gone through many, many changes, the Bourne
shell is still popular and essentially unchanged. Several
UNIX utilities and administration features depend on it.

The first widely used alternative shell was the C shell, or
_csh_. This was written by Bill Joy at the University of
California at Berkeley as part of the Berkeley Software
Distribution (BSD) version of UNIX that came out a
couple of years after Version 7.

The C shell gets its name from the resemblance of its
commands to statements in the C Programming
Language, which makes the shell easier for programmers
on UNIX systems to learn. It supports a number of
operating system features (e.g., job control; seeChapter
8) that were unique to BSD UNIX but by now have
migrated to most other modern versions. It also has a few


important features (e.g., aliases; seeChapter 3) that make
it easier to use in general.

In recent years a number of other shells have become
popular. The most notable of these is the Korn shell. This
shell is a commercial product that incorporates the best
features of the Bourne and C shells, plus many features of
its own.[1] The Korn shell is similar to _bash_ in most
respects; both have an abundance of features that make
them easy to work with. The advantage of _bash_ is that it
is free. For further information on the Korn shell see
Appendix A.

## The Bourne Again Shell

The Bourne Again shell (named in punning tribute to
Steve Bourne's shell) was created for use in the GNU
project.[2] The GNU project was started by Richard
Stallman of the Free Software Foundation (FSF) for the
purpose of creating a UNIX-compatible operating system
and replacing all of the commercial UNIX utilities with
freely distributable ones. GNU embodies not only new
software utilities, but a new distribution concept: the
_copyleft_. Copylefted software may be freely distributed so
long as no restrictions are placed on further distribution
(for example, the source code must be made freely
available).

_bash_ , intended to be the standard shell for the GNU
system, was officially "born" on Sunday, January 10,


1988. Brian Fox wrote the original versions of _bash_ and
_readline_ and continued to improve the shell up until 1993.
Early in 1989 he was joined by Chet Ramey, who was
responsible for numerous bug fixes and the inclusion of
many useful features. Chet Ramey is now the official
maintainer of _bash_ and continues to make further
enhancements.

In keeping with the GNU principles, all versions of _bash_
since 0.99 have been freely available from the FSF. _bash_
has found its way onto every major version of UNIX and
is rapidly becoming the most popular Bourne shell
derivative. It is the standard shell included with Linux, a
widely used free UNIX operating system, and Apple's
Mac OS X.

In 1995 Chet Ramey began working on a major new
release, 2.0, which was released to the public for the first
time on December 23, 1996. _bash_ 2.0 added a range of
new features to the old release (the one before being
1.14.7) and brought the shell into better compliance with
various standards. bash 3.0 improves on the previous
version and rounds out the feature list and standards
compliance.

This book describes _bash_ 3.0. It is applicable to all
previous releases of _bash_. Any features of the current
release that are different in, or missing from, previous
releases will be noted in the text.


## Features of bash

Although the Bourne shell is still known as the "standard"
shell, _bash_ is becoming increasingly popular. In addition
to its Bourne shell compatibility, it includes the best
features of the C and Korn shells as well as several
advantages of its own.

_bash_ 's command-line editing modes are the features that
tend to attract people to it first. With command-line
editing, it's much easier to go back and fix mistakes or
modify previous commands than it is with the C shell's
history mechanism—and the Bourne shell doesn't let you
do this at all.

The other major _bash_ feature that is intended mostly for
interactive users is job control. AsChapter 8explains, job
control gives you the ability to stop, start, and pause any
number of commands at the same time. This feature was
borrowed almost verbatim from the C shell.

The rest of _bash_ 's important advantages are meant mainly
for shell customizers and programmers. It has many new
options and variables for customization, and its
programming features have been significantly expanded
to include function definition, more control structures,
integer arithmetic, advanced I/O control, and more.


[1]The Korn shell can be downloaded for free but it

comes with a license that will require payment if the shell
is used in certain situations.

[2]GNU is a recursive acronym, standing for "GNU's Not

UNIX."


# Getting bash

You may or may not be using _bash_ right now. Your
system administrator probably set your account up with
whatever shell he uses as the "standard" on the system.
You may not even have been aware that there is more
than one shell available.

Yet it's easy for you to determine which shell you are
using. Log in to your system and type **echo $SHELL** at
the prompt. You will see a response containing **sh** , **csh** ,
**ksh** , or **bash** ; these denote the Bourne, C, Korn, and _bash_
shells, respectively. (There's also a chance that you're
using another shell such as _tcsh_ .)

If you aren't using _bash_ and you want to, then you first
need to find out if it exists on your system. Just type
**bash**. If you get a new prompt consisting of some
information followed by a dollar sign (e.g., **bash3 $** ),
then all is well; type **exit** to go back to your normal shell.

If you get a "not found" message, your system may not
have it. Ask your system administrator or another
knowledgeable user; there's a chance that you might have
some version of _bash_ installed on the system in a place
(directory) that is not normally accessible to you. If not,
readChapter 11to find out how you can obtain a version
of _bash_.


Once you know you have _bash_ on your system, you can
invoke it from whatever other shell you use by typing
**bash** as above. However, it's much better to install it as
your _login shell_ , i.e., the shell that you get automatically
whenever you log in. You may be able to do the
installation by yourself. Here are instructions that are
designed to work on the widest variety of UNIX systems.
If something doesn't work (e.g., you type in a command
and get a "not found" error message or a blank line as the
response), you'll have to abort the process and see your
system administrator. Alternatively, turn to Chapter 12
where we demonstrate a less straightforward way of
replacing your current shell.

You need to find out where _bash_ is on your system, i.e.,
in which directory it's installed. You might be able to find
the location by typing **whereis bash** (especially if you are
using the C shell); if that doesn't work, try **whence bash** ,
**which bash** , or this complex command:[3]

```
grep bash /etc/passwd | awk -F: '{print $7}' | sort -u
```
You should see a response that looks like _/bin/bash_ or
_/usr/local/bin/bash_.

To install _bash_ as your login shell, type **chsh** _bash-name_ ,
where _bash-name_ is the response you got to your **whereis**
command (or whatever worked). For example:

```
% chsh /usr/local/bin/bash
```
You'll either get an error message saying that the shell is
invalid, or you'll be prompted for your password.[4]Type


in your password, then log out and log back in again to
start using _bash_.

[3]Make sure you use the correct quotation mark in this

command: ' rather than _`_.

[4]For system security reasons, only certain programs are

allowed to be installed as login shells.


# Interactive Shell Use

When you use the shell interactively, you engage in a
login session that begins when you log in and ends when
you type **exit** or **logout** or press CTRL-D.[5]During a
login session, you type in _command lines_ to the shell;
these are lines of text ending in RETURN that you type in
to your terminal or workstation.

By default, the shell prompts you for each command with
an information string followed by a dollar sign, though as
you will see in Chapter 3, the entire prompt can be
changed.

## Commands, Arguments, and

## Options

Shell command lines consist of one or more words, which
are separated on a command line by blanks or TABs. The
first word on the line is the _command_. The rest (if any)
are _arguments_ (also called _parameters_ ) to the command,
which are names of things on which the command will
act.

For example, the command line **lp myfile** consists of the
command _lp_ (print a file) and the single argument **myfile**.


_lp_ treats **myfile** as the name of a file to print. Arguments
are often names of files, but not necessarily: in the
command line **mail cam** , the _mail_ program treats **cam** as
the username to which a message will be sent.

An _option_ is a special type of argument that gives the
command specific information on what it is supposed to
do. Options usually consist of a dash followed by a letter;
we say "usually" because this is a convention rather than
a hard-and-fast rule. The command **lp -h myfile** contains
the option **-h** , which tells _lp_ not to print the "banner page"
before it prints the file.

Sometimes options take their own arguments. For
example, **lp -d lp1 -h myfile** has two options and one
argument. The first option is **-d lp1** , which means "Send
the output to the printer (destination) called **lp1** ." The
second option and argument are the same as in the
previous example.

[5]The shell can be set up so that it ignores a single

CTRL-D to end the session. We recommend doing this,
because CTRL-D is too easy to type by accident. See the
section on options inChapter 3for further details.


# Files

Although arguments to commands aren't always files,
files are the most important types of "things" on any
UNIX system. A file can contain any kind of information,
and indeed there are different types of files. Three types
are by far the most important:

**_Regular files_**

```
Also called text files; these contain readable
characters. For example, this book was created from
several regular files that contain the text of the book
plus human-readable formatting instructions to the
troff word processor.
```
**_Executable files_**

```
Also called programs; these are invoked as
commands. Some can't be read by humans;
others—the shell scripts that we'll examine in this
book—are just special text files. The shell itself is a
(non-human-readable) executable file called bash.
```
**_Directories_**

```
These are like folders that contain other
files—possibly other directories (called
subdirectories ).
```

## Directories

Let's review the most important concepts about
directories. The fact that directories can contain other
directories leads to a hierarchical structure, more
popularly known as a _tree_ , for all files on a UNIX system.

Figure 1-1 shows part of a typical directory tree;
rectangles are directories and ovals are regular files.

```
Figure 1-2. A tree of directories and files
```

The top of the tree is a directory called _root_ that has no
name on the system.[6] All files can be named by
expressing their location on the system relative to _root_ ;
such names are built by listing all of the directory names
(in order from _root_ ), separated by slashes ( **/** ), followed by
the file's name. This way of naming files is called a _full_
(or _absolute_ ) _pathname_.

For example, say there is a file called _aaiw_ that is in the
directory _book_ , which is in the directory _cam_ , which is in
the directory _home_ , which is in the root directory. This
file's full pathname is _/home/cam/book/aaiw_.

### The working directory

Of course, it's annoying to have to use full pathnames
whenever you need to specify a file. So there is also the
concept of the working directory (sometimes called the
current directory), which is the directory you are "in" at
any given time. If you give a pathname with no leading
slash, then the location of the file is worked out relative to
the working directory. Such pathnames are called _relative_
pathnames; you'll use them much more often than full
pathnames.

When you log in to the system, your working directory is
initially set to a special directory called your _home_ (or
_login_ ) directory. System administrators often set up the
system so that everyone's home directory name is the


same as their login name, and all home directories are
contained in a common directory under _root_.

For example, _/home/cam_ is a typical home directory. If
this is your working directory and you give the command
**lp memo** , then the system looks for the file _memo_ in
_/home/cam_. If you have a directory called _hatter_ in your
home directory, and it contains the file _teatime_ , then you
can print it with the command **lp hatter/teatime**.


### Tilde notation

As you can well imagine, home directories occur often in
pathnames. Although many systems are organized so that
all home directories have a common parent (such as
_/home_ or _/users_ ), you should not rely on that being the
case, nor should you even have to know the absolute
pathname of someone's home directory.

Therefore, _bash_ has a way of abbreviating home
directories: just precede the name of the user with a tilde
( **~** ). For example, you could refer to the file _story_ in user
**alice** 's home directory as _~alice/story_. This is an absolute
pathname, so it doesn't matter what your working
directory is when you use it. If **alice** 's home directory has
a subdirectory called _adventure_ and the file is in there
instead, you can use _~alice/adventure/story_ as its name.

Even more convenient, a tilde by itself refers to your own
home directory. You can refer to a file called _notes_ in
your home directory as _~/notes_ (note the difference
between that and _~notes_ , which the shell would try to
interpret as user _notes_ 's home directory). If _notes_ is in
your _adventure_ subdirectory, then you can call it
_~/adventure/notes_. This notation is handiest when your
working directory is not in your home directory tree, e.g.,
when it's some system directory like _/tmp_.


### Changing working directories

If you want to change your working directory, use the
command **cd**. If you don't remember your working
directory, the command **pwd** tells the shell to print it.

**cd** takes as an argument the name of the directory you
want to become your working directory. It can be relative
to your current directory, it can contain a tilde, or it can
be absolute (starting with a slash). If you omit the
argument, **cd** changes to your home directory (i.e., it's the
same as **cd ~** ).

Table 1-1 gives some sample **cd** commands. Each
command assumes that your working directory is _/home/
cam_ just before the command is executed, and that your
directory structure looks likeFigure 1-1.

**Table 1-1. Sample cd commands**

```
Command New working directory
```
```
cd book /home/cam/book
```
```
cd book/wonderland /home/cam/book/wonderland
```

```
Command New working directory
```
```
cd ~/book/wonderland /home/cam/book/wonderland
```
```
cd /usr/lib /usr/lib
```
```
cd .. /home
```
```
cd ../gryphon /home/gryphon
```
```
cd ~gryphon /home/gryphon
```
The first four are straightforward. The next two use a
special directory called**.**. (two dots), which means "parent
of this directory." Every directory has one of these; it's a
universal way to get to the directory above the current
one in the hierarchy—which is called the parent
directory.[7]

Another feature of _bash_ 's **cd** command is the form **cd -** ,
which changes to whatever directory you were in before
the current one. For example, if you start out in _/usr/lib_ ,


type **cd** without an argument to go to your home
directory, and then type **cd -** , you will be back in _/usr/lib_.


## Filenames, Wildcards, and

## Pathname Expansion

Sometimes you need to run a command on more than one
file at a time. The most common example of such a
command is _ls_ , which lists information about files. In its
simplest form, without options or arguments, it lists the
names of all files in the working directory except special
hidden files, whose names begin with a dot (.).

If you give _ls_ filename arguments, it will list those
files—which is sort of silly: if your current directory has
the files _duchess_ and _queen_ in it and you type **ls duchess
queen** , the system will simply print those filenames.

Actually, _ls_ is more often used with options that tell it to
list information about the files, like the **-l** (long) option,
which tells _ls_ to list the file's owner, size, time of last
modification, and other information, or **-a** (all), which
also lists the hidden files described above. But sometimes
you want to verify the existence of a certain group of files
without having to know all of their names; for example, if
you use a text editor, you might want to see which files in
your current directory have names that end in _.txt_.

Filenames are so important in UNIX that the shell
provides a built-in way to specify the pattern of a set of


filenames without having to know all of the names
themselves. You can use special characters, called
_wildcards_ , in filenames to turn them into patterns.Table
1-2lists the basic wildcards.

**Table 1-2. Basic wildcards**

```
Wildcard Matches
```
```
? Any single character
```
```
* Any string of characters
```
```
[ set ] Any character in set
```
```
[! set ] Any character not in set
```
The**?** wildcard matches any single character, so that if
your directory contains the files _program.c_ , _program.log_ ,
and _program.o_ , then the expression **program**.**?** matches
_program.c_ and _program.o_ but not _program.log_.

The asterisk ( ***** ) is more powerful and far more widely
used; it matches any string of characters. The expression
**program**. ***** will match all three files in the previous


paragraph; text editor users can use the expression ***.txt**
to match their input files.[8]

Table 1-3 should help demonstrate how the asterisk
works. Assume that you have the files _bob_ , _darlene_ , _dave_ ,
_ed_ , _frank_ , and _fred_ in your working directory.

**Table 1-3. Using the * wildcard**

```
Expression Yields
```
```
fr* frank fred
```
```
* ed ed fred
```
```
b* bob
```
```
* e * darlene dave ed fred
```
```
* r * darlene frank fred
```
```
* bob darlene dave ed frank fred
```

```
Expression Yields
```
```
d * e darlene dave
```
```
g* g*
```
Notice that ***** can stand for nothing: both ***ed** and ***e***
match _ed_. Also notice that the last example shows what
the shell does if it can't match anything: it just leaves the
string with the wildcard untouched.

The remaining wildcard is the _set_ construct. A set is a list
of characters (e.g., abc), an inclusive range (e.g., a-z), or
some combination of the two. If you want the dash
character to be part of a list, just list it first or last.Table
1-4should explain things more clearly.

**Table 1-4. Using the set construct wildcards**

```
Expression Matches
```
```
[abc] a, b, or c
```

**Expression Matches**

[.,;] Period, comma, or semicolon

[-_] Dash or underscore

[a-c] a, b, or c

[a-z] All lowercase letters

[!0-9] All non-digits

[0-9!] All digits and exclamation point

[a-zA-Z] All lower- and uppercase letters

[a-zA-Z0-9_-]
All letters, all digits, underscore, and
dash


In the original wildcard example, **program.[co]** and
**program.[a-z]** both match _program.c_ and _program.o_ , but
not _program.log_.

An exclamation point after the left bracket lets you
"negate" a set. For example, **[!.;]** matches any character
except period and semicolon; **[!a-zA-Z]** matches any
character that isn't a letter. To match**!** itself, place it after
the first character in the set, or precede it with a
backslash, as in **[\!]**.

The range notation is handy, but you shouldn't make too
many assumptions about what characters are included in a
range. It's safe to use a range for uppercase letters,
lowercase letters, digits, or any subranges thereof (e.g.,
**[f-q]** , **[2-6]** ). Don't use ranges on punctuation characters
or mixed-case letters: e.g., **[a-Z]** and **[A-z]** should not be
trusted to include all of the letters and nothing more. The
problem is that such ranges are not entirely portable
between different types of computers.[9]

The process of matching expressions containing
wildcards to filenames is called _wildcard expansion_ or
_globbing_. This is just one of several steps the shell takes
when reading and processing a command line; another
that we have already seen is tilde expansion, where tildes
are replaced with home directories where applicable.
We'll see others in later chapters, and the full details of
the process are enumerated inChapter 7.


However, it's important to be aware that the commands
that you run only see the results of wildcard expansion.
That is, they just see a list of arguments, and they have no
knowledge of how those arguments came into being. For
example, if you type **ls fr*** and your files are as on the
previous page, then the shell expands the command line
to **ls fred frank** and invokes the command _ls_ with
arguments **fred** and **frank**. If you type **ls g*** , then
(because there is no match) _ls_ will be given the literal
string **g*** and will complain with the error message, **g*:
No such file or directory** .[10]

Here is an example that should help make things clearer.
Suppose you are a C programmer. This means that you
deal with files whose names end in _.c_ (programs, also
known as source files), _.h_ (header files for programs), and
_.o_ (object code files that aren't human-readable), as well
as other files. Let's say you want to list all source, object,
and header files in your working directory. The command
**ls *.[cho]** does the trick. The shell expands ***.[cho]** to all
files whose names end in a period followed by a **c** , **h** , or **o**
and passes the resulting list to _ls_ as arguments. In other
words, _ls_ will see the filenames just as if they were all
typed in individually—but notice that we required no
knowledge of the actual filenames whatsoever! We let the
wildcards do the work.

The wildcard examples that we have seen so far are
actually part of a more general concept called _pathname
expansion_. Just as it is possible to use wildcards in the
current directory, they can also be used as part of a


pathname. For example, if you wanted to list all of the
files in the directories _/usr_ and _/usr2_ , you could type **ls
/usr***. If you were only interested in the files beginning
with the letters _b_ and _e_ in these directories, you could
type **ls /usr*/[be]*** to list them.


## Brace Expansion

A concept closely related to pathname expansion is brace
expansion. Whereas pathname expansion wildcards will
expand to files and directories that exist, brace expansion
expands to an arbitrary string of a given form: an optional
_preamble_ , followed by comma-separated strings between
braces, and followed by an optional _postscript_. If you
type **echo b{ed,olt,ar}s** , you'll see the words _beds_ , _bolts_ ,
and _bars_ printed. Each instance of a string inside the
braces is combined with the preamble _b_ and the postscript
_s_. Notice that these are not filenames—the strings
produced are independent of filenames. It is also possible
to nest the braces, as in **b{ar{d,n,k},ed}s**. This will result
in the expansion _bards_ , _barns_ , _barks_ , and _beds_.

You can also use a slightly different type of brace
expansion for creating a sequence of letters or numbers. If
you type **echo {2..5}** you'll see this expands to _2 3 4 5_.
Typing **echo {d..h}** results in the expansion _d e f g h_ .[11]

Brace expansion can also be used with wildcard
expansions. In the example from the previous section
where we listed the source, object, and header files in the
working directory, we could have used **ls *.{c,h,o}** .[12]


[6]Most UNIX tutorials say that _root_ has the name **/**. We

stand by this alternative explanation because it is more
logically consistent with the rest of the UNIX filename
conventions.

[7]Each directory also has the special directory. (single

dot), which just means "this directory." Thus, **cd**.
effectively does nothing. Both. and**.**. are actually special
hidden files in each directory that point to the directory
itself and to its parent directory, respectively. _root_ is its
own parent.

[8]MS-DOS and VAX/VMS users should note that there

is _nothing special_ about the dot (.) in UNIX filenames
(aside from the leading dot, which "hides" the file); it's
just another character. For example, **ls *** lists all files in
the current directory; you don't need ***.*** as you do on
other systems. Indeed, **ls *.*** won't list all the files—only
those that have at least one dot in the middle of the name.

[9]Specifically, ranges depend on the character encoding

scheme your computer uses (normally ASCII, but IBM
mainframes use EBCDIC) and the character set used by
the current locale (ranges in languages other than English
may not give expected results).

[10] This is different from the C shell's wildcard

mechanism, which prints an error message and doesn't
execute the command at all.


[11]This form of brace expansion is not available in _bash_

prior to Version 3.0.

[12]This differs slightly from C shell brace expansion.

_bash_ requires at least one unquoted comma to perform an
expansion; otherwise, the word is left unchanged, e.g.,
**b{o}lt** remains as **b{o}lt**.


# Input and Output

The software field—really, any scientific field—tends to
advance most quickly and impressively on those few
occasions when someone (i.e., not a committee) comes up
with an idea that is small in concept yet enormous in its
implications. The standard input and output scheme of
UNIX has to be on the short list of such ideas, along with
such classic innovations as the LISP language, the
relational data model, and object-oriented programming.

The UNIX I/O scheme is based on two dazzlingly simple
ideas. First, UNIX file I/O takes the form of arbitrarily
long sequences of characters (bytes). In contrast, file
systems of older vintage have more complicated I/O
schemes (e.g., "block," "record," "card image," etc.).
Second, everything on the system that produces or
accepts data is treated as a file; this includes hardware
devices like disk drives and terminals. Older systems
treated every device differently. Both of these ideas have
made systems programmers' lives much more pleasant.

## Standard I/O

By convention, each UNIX program has a single way of
accepting input called _standard input_ , a single way of
producing output called _standard output_ , and a single


way of producing error messages called _standard error
output_ , usually shortened to _standard error_. Of course, a
program can have other input and output sources as well,
as we will see inChapter 7.

Standard I/O was the first scheme of its kind that was
designed specifically for interactive users at terminals,
rather than the older batch style of use that usually
involved decks of punch-cards. Since the UNIX shell
provides the user interface, it should come as no surprise
that standard I/O was designed to fit in very neatly with
the shell.

All shells handle standard I/O in basically the same way.
Each program that you invoke has all three standard I/O
channels set to your terminal or workstation, so that
standard input is your keyboard, and standard output and
error are your screen or window. For example, the _mail_
utility prints messages to you on the standard output, and
when you use it to send messages to other users, it
accepts your input on the standard input. This means that
you view messages on your screen and type new ones in
on your keyboard.

When necessary, you can redirect input and output to
come from or go to a file instead. If you want to send the
contents of a pre-existing file to someone as mail, you
redirect _mail_ 's standard input so that it reads from that file
instead of your keyboard.


You can also hook programs together in a _pipeline_ , in
which the standard output of one program feeds directly
into the standard input of another; for example, you could
feed _mail_ output directly to the _lp_ program so that
messages are printed instead of shown on the screen.

This makes it possible to use UNIX utilities as building
blocks for bigger programs. Many UNIX utility programs
are meant to be used in this way: they each perform a
specific type of filtering operation on input text. Although
this isn't a textbook on UNIX utilities, they are essential
to productive shell use. The more popular filtering
utilities are listed inTable 1-5.

**Table 1-5. Popular UNIX data filtering utilities**

```
Utility Purpose
```
```
cat Copy input to output
```
```
grep Search for strings in the input
```
```
sort Sort lines in the input
```
```
cut Extract columns from input
```

```
Utility Purpose
```
```
sed Perform editing operations on input
```
```
tr
Translate characters in the input to other
characters
```
You may have used some of these before and noticed that
they take names of input files as arguments and produce
output on standard output. You may not know, however,
that all of them (and most other UNIX utilities) accept
input from standard input if you omit the argument.[13]

For example, the most basic utility is _cat_ , which simply
copies its input to its output. If you type **cat** with a
filename argument, it will print out the contents of that
file on your screen. But if you invoke it with no
arguments, it will expect standard input and copy it to
standard output. Try it: _cat_ will wait for you to type a line
of text; when you type RETURN, _cat_ will repeat the text
back to you. To stop the process, hit CTRL-D at the
beginning of a line. You will see **^D** when you type
CTRL-D. Here's what this should look like:

```
$ cat
Here is a line of text.
Here is a line of text.
```

**This is another line of text.**
This is another line of text.
**^D**
$


## I/O Redirection

_cat_ is short for "catenate," i.e., link together. It accepts
multiple filename arguments and copies them to the
standard output. But let's pretend, for now, that _cat_ and
other utilities don't accept filename arguments and accept
only standard input. As we said above, the shell lets you
redirect standard input so that it comes from a file. The
notation _command_ **<** _filename_ does this; it sets things up
so that _command_ takes standard input from a file instead
of from a terminal.

For example, if you have a file called _cheshire_ that
contains some text, then **cat < cheshire** will print
_cheshire_ 's contents out onto your terminal. **sort <
cheshire** will sort the lines in the _cheshire_ file and print
the result on your terminal (remember: we're pretending
that these utilities don't take filename arguments).

Similarly, _command_ **>** _filename_ causes the _command_ 's
standard output to be redirected to the named file. The
classic "canonical" example of this is **date > now** : the
_date_ command prints the current date and time on the
standard output; the previous command saves it in a file
called _now_.

Input and output redirectors can be combined. For
example: the _cp_ command is normally used to copy files;


if for some reason it didn't exist or was broken, you could
use _cat_ in this way:

```
$ cat <
file1
>
file2
```
This would be similar to **cp file1 file2**.


## Pipelines

It is also possible to redirect the output of a command
into the standard input of another command instead of a
file. The construct that does this is called the pipe, notated
as **|**. A command line that includes two or more
commands connected with pipes is called a pipeline.

Pipes are very often used with the _more_ command, which
works just like _cat_ except that it prints its output screen
by screen, pausing for the user to type SPACE (next
screen), RETURN (next line), or other commands. If
you're in a directory with a large number of files and you
want to see details about them, **ls -l | more** will give you a
detailed listing a screen at a time.

Pipelines can get very complex, and they can also be
combined with other I/O directors. To see a sorted listing
of the file _cheshire_ a screen at a time, type **sort <
cheshire | more**. To print it instead of viewing it on your
terminal, type **sort < cheshire | lp**.

Here's a more complicated example. The file _/etc/passwd_
stores information about users' accounts on a UNIX
system. Each line in the file contains a user's login name,
user ID number, encrypted password, home directory,
login shell, and other information. The first field of each


line is the login name; fields are separated by colons (:).
A sample line might look like this:

```
cam:LM1c7GhNesD4GhF3iEHrH4FeCKB/:501:100:Cameron Newham:/home/cam:/bin/bash
```
To get a sorted listing of all users on the system, type:

```
$ cut -d: -f1 < /etc/passwd | sort
```
(Actually, you can omit the **<** , since _cut_ accepts input
filename arguments.) The _cut_ command extracts the first
field ( **-f1** ), where fields are separated by colons ( **-d** :),
from the input. The entire pipeline will print a list that
looks like this:

```
adm
bin
cam
daemon
davidqc
ftp
games
gonzo
...
```
If you want to send the list directly to the printer (instead
of your screen), you can extend the pipeline like this:

```
$ cut -d: -f1 < /etc/passwd | sort | lp
```
Now you should see how I/O directors and pipelines
support the UNIX building block philosophy. The
notation is extremely terse and powerful. Just as
important, the pipe concept eliminates the need for messy


temporary files to store command output before it is fed
into other commands.

For example, to do the same sort of thing as the above
command line on other operating systems (assuming that
equivalent utilities are available...), you need three
commands. On DEC's VAX/VMS system, they might
look like this:

```
$ cut [etc]passwd /d=":" /f=1 /out=temp1
$ sort temp1 /out=temp2
$ print temp2
$ delete temp1 temp2
```
After sufficient practice, you will find yourself routinely
typing in powerful command pipelines that do in one line
what it would take several commands (and temporary
files) in other operating systems to accomplish.

[13]If a particular UNIX utility doesn't accept standard

input when you leave out the filename argument, try
using a dash ( **-** ) as the argument. Some UNIX systems
provide standard input as a file, so you could try
providing the file _/dev/stdin_ as the input file argument.


# Background Jobs

Pipes are actually a special case of a more general
feature: doing more than one thing at a time. This is a
capability that many other commercial operating systems
don't have, because of the rigid limits that they tend to
impose upon users. UNIX, on the other hand, was
developed in a research lab and meant for internal use, so
it does relatively little to impose limits on the resources
available to users on a computer—as usual, leaning
towards uncluttered simplicity rather than
overcomplexity.

"Doing more than one thing at a time" means running
more than one program at the same time. You do this
when you invoke a pipeline; you can also do it by logging
on to a UNIX system as many times simultaneously as
you wish. (If you try that on an IBM's VM/CMS system,
for example, you will get an obnoxious "already logged
in" message.)

The shell also lets you run more than one command at a
time during a single login session. Normally, when you
type a command and hit RETURN, the shell will let the
command have control of your terminal until it is done;
you can't type in further commands until the first one is
done. But if you want to run a command that does not
require user input and you want to do other things while


the command is running, put an ampersand (&) after the
command.

This is called running the command in the background,
and a command that runs in this way is called a
background job; by contrast, a job run the normal way is
called a foreground job. When you start a background
job, you get your shell prompt back immediately,
enabling you to enter other commands.

The most obvious use for background jobs is programs
that take a long time to run, such as _sort_ or _uncompress_
on large files. For example, assume you just got an
enormous compressed file loaded into your directory
from magnetic tape.[14]Let's say the file is _gcc.tar.Z_ ,
which is a compressed archive file that contains well over
10 MB of source code files.

Type **uncompress gcc.tar &** (you can omit the .Z), and
the system will start a job in the background that
uncompresses the data "in place" and ends up with the
file _gcc.tar_. Right after you type the command, you will
see a line like this:

```
[1] 175
```
followed by your shell prompt, meaning that you can
enter other commands. Those numbers give you ways of
referring to your background job; Chapter 8 explains
them in detail.


You can check on background jobs with the command
**jobs**. For each background job, **jobs** prints a line similar
to the above but with an indication of the job's status:

```
[1]+ Running uncompress gcc.tar &
```
When the job finishes, you will see a message like this
right before your shell prompt:

```
[1]+ Done uncompress gcc.tar
```
The message changes if your background job terminated
with an error; again, seeChapter 8for details.

## Background I/O

Jobs you put in the background should not do I/O to your
terminal. Just think about it for a moment and you'll
understand why.

By definition, a background job doesn't have control over
your terminal. Among other things, this means that only
the foreground process (or, if none, the shell itself) is
"listening" for input from your keyboard. If a background
job needs keyboard input, it will often just sit there doing
nothing until you do something about it (as described in
Chapter 8).

If a background job produces screen output, the output
will just appear on your screen. If you are running a job
in the foreground that produces output too, then the


output from the two jobs will be randomly (and often
annoyingly) interspersed.

If you want to run a job in the background that expects
standard input or produces standard output, you usually
want to redirect the I/O so that it comes from or goes to a
file. Programs that produce small, one-line messages
(warnings, "done" messages, etc.) are an exception to this
general rule; you may not mind if these are interspersed
with whatever other output you are seeing at a given time.

For example, the _diff_ utility examines two files, whose
names are given as arguments, and prints a summary of
their differences on the standard output. If the files are
exactly the same, _diff_ is silent. Usually, you invoke _diff_
expecting to see a few lines that are different.

_diff_ , like _sort_ and _compress_ , can take a long time to run if
the input files are very large. Suppose that you have two
large files that are called _warandpeace.txt_ and
_warandpeace.txt.old_. The command **diff
warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old** [15]reveals that
the author decided to change the name "Ivan" to
"Aleksandr" throughout the entire file—i.e., hundreds of
differences, resulting in very large amounts of output.

If you type **diff warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old
&** , then the system will spew lots and lots of output at
you, which will be difficult to stop—even with the
techniques explained inChapter 7. However, if you type:

```
$ diff warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old > txtdiff &
```

then the differences will be saved in the file _txtdiff_ for you
to examine later.


## Background Jobs and Priorities

Background jobs can save you a lot of thumb-twiddling
time. Just remember that such jobs eat up lots of system
resources like memory and the processor (CPU). Just
because you're running several jobs at once doesn't mean
that they will run faster than they would if run
sequentially—in fact, performance is usually slightly
worse.

Every job on the system is assigned a _priority_ , a number
that tells the operating system how much priority to give
the job when it doles out resources (the higher the
number, the lower the priority). Commands that you enter
from the shell, whether foreground or background jobs,
usually have the same priority. The system administrator
is able to run commands at a higher priority than normal
users.

Note that if you're on a multiuser system, running lots of
background jobs may eat up more than your fair share of
resources, and you should consider whether having your
job run as fast as possible is really more important than
being a good citizen.


Speaking of good citizenship, there is also a UNIX
command that lets you lower the priority of any job: the
aptly named _nice_. If you type **nice** _command_ , where
_command_ can be a complex shell command line with
pipes, redirectors, etc., then the command will run at a
lower priority.[16]You can control just how much lower
by giving _nice_ a numerical argument; consult the _nice_
manpage for details.[17]

[14]Compressed files are created by the _compress_ utility,

which packs files into smaller amounts of space; they
have names of the form _filename.Z_ , where _filename_ is the
name of the original uncompressed file.

[15]You could use **diff warandpeace*** as a shorthand to

save typing—as long as there are no other files with
names of that form. Remember that _diff_ doesn't see the
arguments until after the shell has expanded the
wildcards. Many people overlook this use of wildcards.

[16]Complex commands following _nice_ should be quoted.

[17]If you are a system administrator logged in as **root** ,

then you can also use _nice_ to raise a job's priority.


# Special Characters and Quoting

The characters **<** , **>** , **|** , and **&** are four examples of _special
characters_ that have particular meanings to the shell. The
wildcards we saw earlier in this chapter ( ***** ,**?** , and **[** ... **]** )
are also special characters.

Table 1-6 gives the meanings of all special characters
within shell command lines only. Other characters have
special meanings in specific situations, such as the
regular expressions and string-handling operators that
we'll see inChapter 3andChapter 4.

**Table 1-6. Special characters**

```
Character Meaning
See
chapter
```
```
~ Home directory Chapter 1
```
#### `

```
Command substitution
(archaic)
Chapter 4
```

**Character Meaning**

```
See
chapter
```
**#** Comment Chapter 4

**$** Variable expression Chapter 3

**&** Background job Chapter 1

***** String wildcard Chapter 1

**(** Start subshell Chapter 8

**)** End subshell Chapter 8

**\** Quote next character Chapter 1

**|** Pipe Chapter 1

**[** Start character-set wildcard Chapter 1


**Character Meaning**

```
See
chapter
```
**]** End character-set wildcard Chapter 1

**{** Start command block Chapter 7

**}** End command block Chapter 7

**;** Shell command separator Chapter 3

` Strong quote Chapter 1

<"> Weak quote Chapter 1

**<** Input redirect Chapter 1

**>** Output redirect Chapter 1

**/** Pathname directory separator Chapter 1


```
Character Meaning
```
```
See
chapter
```
```
? Single-character wildcard Chapter 1
```
```
! Pipeline logical NOT Chapter 5
```
## Quoting

Sometimes you will want to use special characters
literally, i.e., without their special meanings. This is
called _quoting_. If you surround a string of characters with
single quotation marks (or _quotes_ ), you strip all
characters within the quotes of any special meaning they
might have.

The most obvious situation where you might need to
quote a string is with the **echo** command, which just takes
its arguments and prints them to the standard output.
What is the point of this? As you will see in later
chapters, the shell does quite a bit of processing on
command lines—most of which involves some of the
special characters listed inTable 1-6. **echo** is a way of
making the result of that processing available on the
standard output.


What if we want to print the string **2 * 3 > 5 is a valid
inequality**? Suppose you type this:

```
$ echo 2 * 3 > 5 is a valid inequality.
```
You would get your shell prompt back, as if nothing
happened! But then there would be a new file, with the
name _5_ , containing "2", the names of all files in your
current directory, and then the string **3 is a valid
inequality**. Make sure you understand why.[18]

However, if you type:

```
$ echo '2 * 3 > 5 is a valid inequality.'
```
the result is the string, taken literally. You needn't quote
the entire line, just the portion containing special
characters (or characters you think _might_ be special, if
you just want to be sure):

```
$ echo '2 * 3 > 5' is a valid inequality.
```
This has exactly the same result.

Notice that Table 1-6 lists double quotes (") as weak
quotes. A string in double quotes is subjected to _some_ of
the steps the shell takes to process command lines, but
not all. (In other words, it treats only some special
characters as special.) You'll see in later chapters why
double quotes are sometimes preferable; Chapter 7
contains the most comprehensive explanation of the
shell's rules for quoting and other aspects of


command-line processing. For now, though, you should
stick to single quotes.


## Backslash-Escaping

Another way to change the meaning of a character is to
precede it with a backslash (\). This is called
_backslash-escaping_ the character. In most cases, when
you backslash-escape a character, you quote it. For
example:

```
$ echo 2 \* 3 \> 5 is a valid inequality.
```
will produce the same results as if you surrounded the
string with single quotes. To use a literal backslash, just
surround it with quotes (' **\** ') or, even better,
backslash-escape it ( **\\** ).

Here is a more practical example of quoting special
characters. A few UNIX commands take arguments that
often include wildcard characters, which need to be
escaped so the shell doesn't process them first. The most
common such command is _find_ , which searches for files
throughout entire directory trees.

To use _find_ , you supply the root of the tree you want to
search and arguments that describe the characteristics of
the file(s) you want to find. For example, the command
**find**. _-name string_ searches the directory tree whose root
is your current directory for files whose names match the
string. (Other arguments allow you to search by the file's
size, owner, permissions, date of last access, etc.)


You can use wildcards in the string, but you must quote
them, so that the _find_ command itself can match them
against names of files in each directory it searches. The
command **find. -name `*.c** ' will match all files whose
names end in _.c_ anywhere in your current directory,
subdirectories, sub-subdirectories, etc.


## Quoting Quotation Marks

You can also use a backslash to include double quotes
within a quoted string. For example:

```
$ echo \"2 \* 3 \> 5\" is a valid inequality.
```
produces the following output:

```
"2 * 3 > 5" is a valid inequality.
```
However, this won't work with single quotes inside
quoted expressions. For example, **echo** `Hatter\'s tea
party' will not give you **Hatter's tea party**. You can get
around this limitation in various ways. First, try
eliminating the quotes:

```
$ echo Hatter\'s tea party
```
If no other characters are special (as is the case here), this
works. Otherwise, you can use the following command:

```
$ echo 'Hatter'\''s tea party'
```
That is, ` **\** '' (i.e., single quote, backslash, single quote,
single quote) acts like a single quote within a quoted
string. Why? The first ' in ` **\** '' ends the quoted string we
started with **(** ` **Hatter)** , the **\** ' inserts a literal single quote,
and the next ' starts another quoted string that ends with
the word "party". If you understand this, then you will


have no trouble resolving the other bewildering issues
that arise from the shell's often cryptic syntax.


## Continuing Lines

A related issue is how to continue the text of a command
beyond a single line on your terminal or workstation
window. The answer is conceptually simple: just quote
the RETURN key. After all, RETURN is really just
another character.

You can do this in two ways: by ending a line with a
backslash, or by not closing a quote mark (i.e., by
including RETURN in a quoted string). If you use the
backslash, there must be nothing between it and the end
of the line—not even spaces or TABs.

Whether you use a backslash or a single quote, you are
telling the shell to ignore the special meaning of the
RETURN character. After you press RETURN, the shell
understands that you haven't finished your command line
(i.e., since you haven't typed a "real" RETURN), so it
responds with a secondary prompt, which is **>** by default,
and waits for you to finish the line. You can continue a
line as many times as you wish.

For example, if you want the shell to print the first
sentence of of Lewis Carroll's _Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland_ , you can type this:


```
$ echo The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some \
> time in silence: at last Caterpillar took the hookah out of its \
> mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
```
Or you can do it this way:

```
$ echo 'The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some
> time in silence: at last Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
> mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.'
```

## Control Keys

Control keys—those that you type by holding down the
CONTROL (or CTRL) key and hitting another key—are
another type of special character. These normally don't
print anything on your screen, but the operating system
interprets a few of them as special commands. You
already know one of them: RETURN is actually the same
as CTRL-M (try it and see). You have probably also used
the BACKSPACE or DEL key to erase typos on your
command line.

Actually, many control keys have functions that don't
really concern you—yet you should know about them for
future reference and in case you type them by accident.

Perhaps the most difficult thing about control keys is that
they can differ from system to system. The usual
arrangement is shown inTable 1-7, which lists the control
keys that all major modern versions of UNIX support.
Note that DEL and CTRL-**?** are the same character.

You can use the **stty** command to find out what your
settings are and change them if you wish; seeChapter 8
for details. If the version of UNIX on your system is one
of those that derive from BSD (such as SunOS and OS
X), type **stty all** to see your control-key settings; you will
see something like this:


```
erase kill werase rprnt flush lnext susp intr quit stop eof
^? ^U ^W ^R ^O ^V ^Z/^Y ^C ^\ ^S/^Q ^D
```
**Table 1-7. Control keys**

```
Control
key
```
```
stty
name
Function description
```
```
CTRL-C intr Stop current command
```
```
CTRL-D eof End of input
```
```
CTRL-\ quit
Stop current command if
CTRL-C doesn't work
```
```
CTRL-S stop Halt output to screen
```
```
CTRL-Q Restart output to screen
```
```
DEL or
CTRL-?
erase Erase last character
```

```
Control
key
```
```
stty
name
Function description
```
```
CTRL-U kill Erase entire command line
```
```
CTRL-Z susp
Suspend current command (see
Chapter 8)
```
The _^X_ notation stands for CTRL- _X_. If your UNIX
version derives from System III or System V (this
includes AIX, HP/UX, SCO, Linux, and Xenix), type **stty
-a**.

The resulting output will include this information:

```
intr = ^c; quit = ^|; erase = DEL; kill = ^u; eof = ^d; eol = ^`;
swtch = ^`; susp = ^z; dsusp <undef>;
```
The control key you will probably use most often is
CTRL-C, sometimes called the _interrupt_ key. This
stops—or tries to stop—the command that is currently
running. You will want to use this when you enter a
command and find that it's taking too long, you gave it
the wrong arguments, you change your mind about
wanting to run it, or whatever.


Sometimes CTRL-C doesn't work; in that case, if you
really want to stop a job, try CTRL-\. But don't just type
CTRL-\; always try CTRL-C first! Chapter 8 explains
why in detail. For now, suffice it to say that CTRL-C
gives the running job more of a chance to clean up before
exiting, so that files and other resources are not left in
funny states.

We've already seen an example of CTRL-D. When you
are running a command that accepts standard input from
your keyboard, CTRL-D tells the process that your input
is finished—as if the process were reading a file and it
reached the end of the file. _mail_ is a utility in which this
happens often. When you are typing in a message, you
end by typing CTRL-D. This tells _mail_ that your message
is complete and ready to be sent. Most utilities that accept
standard input understand CTRL-D as the end-of-input
character, though many such programs accept commands
like **q** , **quit** , **exit** , etc.

CTRL-S and CTRL-Q are called flow-control characters.
They represent an antiquated way of stopping and
restarting the flow of output from one device to another
(e.g., from the computer to your terminal) that was useful
when the speed of such output was low. They are rather
obsolete in these days of high-speed networks. In fact,
under the latter conditions, CTRL-S and CTRL-Q are
basically a nuisance. The only thing you really need to
know about them is that if your screen output becomes
"stuck," then you may have hit CTRL-S by accident.


Type CTRL-Q to restart the output; any keys you may
have hit in between will then take effect.

The final group of control characters gives you
rudimentary ways to edit your command line. DEL acts
as a backspace key (in fact, some systems use the actual
BACKSPACE or CTRL-H key as "erase" instead of
DEL); CTRL-U erases the entire line and lets you start
over. Again, these have been superseded.[19]The next
chapter will look at _bash_ 's editing modes, which are
among its most useful features and far more powerful
than the limited editing capabilities described here.

[18] This should also teach you something about the

flexibility of placing I/O redirectors anywhere on the
command line—even in places where they don't seem to
make sense.

[19]Why are so many outmoded control keys still in use?

They have nothing to do with the shell _per se_ ; instead,
they are recognized by the _tty driver_ , an old and hoary
part of the operating system's lower depths that controls
input and output to/from your terminal.


# Help

A feature in _bash_ that no other shell has is an online help
system. The **help** command gives information on
commands in _bash_. If you type **help** by itself, you'll get a
list of the built-in shell commands along with their
options.

If you provide **help** with a shell command name it will
give you a detailed description of the command:

```
$ help cd
cd: cd [-L | -P] [dir]
Change the current directory to DIR. The variable $HOME is the
default DIR. The variable $CDPATH defines the search path for
the directory containing DIR. Alternative directory names in
CDPATH are separated by a colon (:). A null directory name is
the same as the current directory, i.e. `.'. If DIR begins with
a slash (/), then $CDPATH is not used. If the directory is not
found, and the shell option `cdable_vars' is set, then try the
word as a variable name. If that variable has a value, then cd
to the value of that variable. The -P option says to use the
physical directory structure instead of following symbolic links;
the -L option forces symbolic links to be followed.
```
You can also provide **help** with a partial name, in which
case it will return details on all commands matching the
partial name. For example, **help re** will provide details on
**read** , **readonly** , and **return**. The partial name can also
include wildcards. You'll need to quote the name to
ensure that the wildcard is not expanded to a filename. So


the last example is equivalent to **help** `re*', and **help**
`re??' will only return details on **read**.

Sometimes **help** will show more than a screenful of
information and it will scroll the screen. You can use the
_more_ command to show one screenful at a time by typing
**help** _command_ **| more**.
