# Chapter 10. bash

# Administration

There are two areas in which system administrators use
the shell as part of their job: setting up a generic
environment for users and for system security. In this
chapter, we'll discuss _bash_ 's features that relate to these
tasks. We assume that you already know the basics of
UNIX system administration.[1]

# Installing bash as the

# Standard Shell

As a prelude to system-wide customization, we want to
emphasize that _bash_ can be installed as if it were the
standard Bourne shell, _/bin/sh_. Indeed, some systems,
such as Linux, come with _bash_ installed instead of the
Bourne shell.

If you want to do this with your system, you can just save
the original Bourne shell to another filename (in case
someone needs to use it) and either install _bash_ as _sh_ in
the _/bin_ directory, or better yet install _bash_ in the _/bin_
directory and create a symbolic link from _/bin/sh_ to _/bin/
bash_ using the command **ln -s /bin/bash /bin/sh**. The
reason we think that the second option is better is because


_bash_ changes its behavior slightly if started as _sh_ , as we
will see shortly.

As detailed inAppendix A, _bash_ is backward-compatible
with the Bourne shell, except that it doesn't support **^** as a
synonym for the pipe character ( **|)**. Unless you have an
ancient UNIX system, or you have some very, very old
shell scripts, you needn't worry about this.

But if you want to be absolutely sure, simply search
through all shell scripts in all directories in your **PATH**.
An easy way to perform the search is to use the _file_
command, which we saw inChapter 5andChapter 9. _file_
prints "executable shell script" when given the name of
one.[2]Here is a script that looks for **^** in shell scripts in
every directory in your **PATH** :

```
IFS=:
for d in $PATH; do
echo checking $d:
cd $d
scripts=$(file * | grep 'shell script' | cut -d: -f1)
for f in $scripts; do
grep '\^' $f /dev/null
done
done
```
The first line of this script makes it possible to use
**$PATH** as an item list in the **for** loop. For each directory,
it **cd** s there and finds all shell scripts by piping the _file_
command into _grep_ and then, to extract the filename only,
into _cut_. Then for each shell script, it searches for the **^**
character.[3]


If you run this script, you will probably find several
occurrences of **^—** but these carets should be used within
regular expressions in _grep_ , _sed_ , or _awk_ commands, not
as pipe characters. As long as carets are never used as
pipes, it is safe for you to install _bash_ as _/bin/sh_.

As we mentioned earlier, if _bash_ is started as _sh_ (because
the executable file has been renamed _sh_ or there is a link
from _sh_ to _bash_ ) its startup behavior will change slightly
to mimic the Bourne shell as closely as possible. For
login shells it only attempts to read _/etc/profile_ and
_~/.profile_ , ignoring any other startup files like
_~/.bash_profile_. For interactive shells it won't read the
initialization file _~/.bashrc_ .[4]

## POSIX Mode

Besides its native operating mode, _bash_ can also be
switched into POSIX mode. The POSIX (Portable
Operating System Interface) standard, described in detail
in Appendix A, defines guidelines for standardizing
UNIX. One part of the POSIX standard covers shells.

_bash_ is nearly 100% POSIX-compliant in its native mode.
If you want strict POSIX adherence, you can either start
_bash_ with the **—posix** option, or set it from within the
shell with **set -o posix**.

Only in very rare circumstances would you ever have to
use POSIX mode. The differences, outlined inAppendix


A, are small and are mostly concerned with the command
lookup order and how functions are handled. Most _bash_
users should be able to get through life without ever
having to use this option.


## Command-Line Options

_bash_ has several command-line options that change the
behavior of and pass information to the shell. The options
fall into two sets: single character options, like we've seen
in previous chapters of this book, and _multicharacter_
options, which are a relatively recent improvement to
UNIX utilities.[5]Table 10-1lists all of the options.[6]

**Table 10-1. bash command-line options**

```
Option Meaning
```
```
-c string
```
```
Commands are read from string , if
present. Any arguments after string
are interpreted as positional
parameters, starting with $0.
```
#### -D

```
A list of all double-quoted strings
preceded by $ is printed on the
standard ouput. These are the
strings that are subject to language
translation when the current locale
```

**Option Meaning**

```
is not C or POSIX. This also turns
on the -n option.
```
-i

```
Interactive shell. Ignores signals
TERM, INT, and QUIT. With job
control in effect, TTIN, TTOU,
and TSTP are also ignored.
```
-l
Makes _bash_ act as if invoked as a
login shell.

-o _option_
Takes the same arguments as **set
-o**.

#### -O, +O

_shopt-option_

```
shopt-option is one of the shell
options accepted by the shopt
builtin. If shopt-option is present,
-O sets the value of that option;
+O unsets it. If shopt-option is not
supplied, the names and values of
the shell options accepted by shopt
are printed on the standard output.
```

**Option Meaning**

```
If the invocation option is +O , the
output is displayed in a format that
may be reused as input.
```
-s

```
Reads commands from the
standard input. If an argument is
given to bash , this flag takes
precedence (i.e., the argument
won't be treated as a script name
and standard input will be read).
```
-r
Restricted shell. See the Section
10.3.1later in this chapter.

-v
Prints shell input lines as they're
read.

#### -

```
Signals the end of options and
disables further option processing.
Any options after this are treated as
filenames and arguments. — is
synonymous with -.
```

**Option Meaning**

—debugger

```
Arranges for the debugger profile
to be executed before the shell
starts. Turns on extended
debugging mode and shell function
tracing.[7]
```
—dump-strings Does the same as **-D**.

—dump-po-strings

```
Does the same as - D but the output
is in the GNU gettext po (portable
object) file format.
```
—help
Displays a usage message and
exits.

—login
Makes _bash_ act as if invoked as a
login shell. Same as - **l**.

—noediting

```
Does not use the GNU readline
library to read command lines if
interactive.
```

**Option Meaning**

—noprofile

```
Does not read the startup file /etc/
profile or any of the personal
initialization files.
```
—norc

```
Does not read the initialization file
~/.bashrc if the shell is interactive.
This is on by default if the shell is
invoked as sh.
```
—posix

```
Changes the behavior of bash to
follow the POSIX guidelines more
closely where the default operation
of bash is different.
```
—quiet
Shows no information on shell
startup. This is the default.

—rcfile _file_ ,
—init-file _file_

```
Executes commands read from file
instead of from the initialization
file ~/.bashrc if the shell is
interactive.
```

```
Option Meaning
```
```
—verbose Equivalent to -v.
```
```
—version
Shows the version number of this
instance of bash and then exits.
```
```
[7]Only available in bash version 3.0 and later.
```
The multicharacter options have to appear on the
command line before the single-character options. In
addition to these, any **set** option can be used on the
command line. Like shell built-ins, using a **+** instead of **-**
turns an option off.

Of these options, the most useful are **-i** (interactive), **-r**
(restricted), **-s** (read from standard input), **-p** (privileged),
and **-m** (enable job control). Login shells are usually run
with the **-i** , **-s** , and **-m** flags. We'll look at restricted and
privileged modes later in this chapter.

[1] A good source of information on system

administration is _Essential System Administration_ by
Æleen Frisch (O'Reilly ).


[2] The exact message varies from system to system;

make sure that yours prints this message when given the
name of a shell script. If not, just substitute the message
your _file_ command prints for "shell script" in the
following code.

[3]The inclusion of _/dev/null_ in the _grep_ command is a

kludge that forces _grep_ to print the names of files that
contain a match, even if there is only one such file in a
given directory.

[4] _bash_ also enters POSIX mode when started as _sh_.

Versions of _bash_ prior to 2.0 don't—POSIX mode has to
be explicitly set with the **—posix** command-line option.

[5] Multicharacter options are far more readable and

easier to remember than the old, and usually cryptic,
single character options. All of the GNU utilities have
multicharacter options, but many applications and utilities
(certainly those on old UNIX systems) allow only
single-character options.

[6]SeeAppendix Bfor a list of options for versions of

_bash_ prior to 2.0.


# Environment

# Customization

Like the Bourne shell, _bash_ uses the file _/etc/profile_ for
system-wide customization. When a user logs in, the shell
reads and runs _/etc/profile_ before running the user's
_.bash_profile_.

We won't cover all the possible commands you might
want to put in _/etc/profile_. But _bash_ has a few unique
features that are particularly relevant to system-wide
customization; we'll discuss them here.

We'll start with two built-in commands that you can use
in _/etc/profile_ to tailor your users' environments and
constrain their use of system resources. Users can also
use these commands in their _.bash_profile_ , or at any other
time, to override the default settings.

## umask

**umask** , like the same command in most other shells, lets
you specify the default permissions that files have when
users create them. It takes the same types of arguments
that the _chmod_ command does, i.e., absolute (octal
numbers) or symbolic permission values.


The **umask** contains the permissions that are turned off
by default whenever a process creates a file, regardless of
what permission the process specifies.[8]

We'll use octal notation to show how this works. As you
probably know, the digits in a permission number stand
(left to right) for the permissions of the owner, owner's
group, and all other users, respectively. Each digit, in
turn, consists of three bits, which specify read, write, and
execute permissions from left to right. (If a file is a
directory, the "execute" permission becomes "search"
permission, i.e., permission to **cd** to it, list its files, etc.)

For example, the octal number 640 equals the binary
number 110 100 000. If a file has this permission, then its
owner can read and write it; users in the owner's group
can only read it; everyone else has no permission on it. A
file with permission 755 gives its owner the right to read,
write, and execute it and everyone else the right to read
and execute (but not write).

022 is a common **umask** value. This implies that when a
file is created, the "most" permission it could possibly
have is 755—which is the usual permission of an
executable that a compiler might create. A text editor, on
the other hand, might create a file with 666 permission
(read and write for everyone), but the **umask** forces it to
be 644 instead.


## ulimit

The **ulimit** command was originally used to specify the
limit on file creation size. But _bash_ 's version has options
that let you put limits on several different system
resources.Table 10-2lists the options.

**Table 10-2. ulimit resource options**

```
Option Resource limited
```
```
-a All limits (for printing values only)
```
```
-c Core file size (1 Kb blocks)
```
```
-d Process data segment (Kb)
```
```
-f File size (1 Kb blocks)
```
```
-l
Maximum size of a process that can be locked
in memory (Kb)[9]
```

**Option Resource limited**

-m Maximum resident set size

-n File descriptors

-p Pipe size (512 byte blocks)

-s Process stack segment (Kb)

-t Process CPU time (seconds)

-u
Maximum number of processes available to a
user

-v Virtual memory (Kb)

[9]Not available in versions of _bash_ prior to 2.0.


Each takes a numerical argument that specifies the limit
in units shown in the table. You can also give the
argument "unlimited" (which may actually mean some
physical limit), "hard" and "soft", which refer to the
current hard and soft limits (see below), or you can omit
the argument, in which case it will print the current limit.
**ulimit -a** prints limits (or "unlimited") of all types.[10]
You can specify only one type of resource at a time. If
you don't specify any option, **-f** is assumed.

Some of these options depend on operating system
capabilities that don't exist in older UNIX versions. In
particular, some older versions have a fixed limit of 20
file descriptors per process (making **-n** irrelevant), and
some don't support virtual memory (making **-v**
irrelevant).

The **-d** and **-s** options have to do with _dynamic memory
allocation_ , i.e., memory for which a process asks the
operating system at runtime. It's not necessary for casual
users to limit these, though software developers may want
to do so to prevent buggy programs from trying to
allocate endless amounts of memory due to infinite loops.

The **-v** and **-m** options are similar; **-v** puts a limit on all
uses of memory, and **-m** limits the amount of physical
memory that a process is allowed to use. You don't need
these unless your system has severe memory constraints
or you want to limit process size to avoid thrashing.


The **-u** option is another option which is useful if you
have system memory constraints or you wish just wish to
stop individual users from hogging the system resources.

You may want to specify limits on file size ( **-f** and **-c** ) if
you have constraints on disk space. Sometimes users
actually mean to create huge files, but more often than
not, a huge file is the result of a buggy program that goes
into an infinite loop. Software developers who use
debuggers like _sdb_ , _dbx_ , and _gdb_ should not limit core file
size, because core dumps are necessary for debugging.

The **-t** option is another possible guard against infinite
loops. However, a program that is in an infinite loop but
isn't allocating memory or writing files is not particularly
dangerous; it's better to leave this unlimited and just let
the user kill the offending program.

In addition to the types of resources you can limit, **ulimit**
lets you specify hard or soft limits. Hard limits can be
lowered by any user but only raised by the super user
( **root** ); users can lower soft limits and raise them—but
only as high as the hard limit for that resource.

If you give **-H** along with one (or more) of the options
above, **ulimit** will set hard limits; **-S** sets soft limits.
Without either of these, **ulimit** sets the hard and soft
limit. For example, the following commands set the soft
limit on file descriptors to 64 and the hard limit to
unlimited:


```
ulimit -Sn 64
ulimit -Hn unlimited
```
When **ulimit** prints current limits, it prints soft limits
unless you specify **-H**.


## Types of Global

## Customization

The best possible approach to globally available
customization would be a system-wide environment file
that is separate from each user's environment file—just
like _/etc/profile_ is separate from each user's _.bash_profile_.
Unfortunately, _bash_ doesn't have this feature.

Nevertheless, the shell gives you a few ways to set up
customizations that are available to all users at all times.
Environment variables are the most obvious; your _/etc/
profile_ file will undoubtedly contain definitions for
several of them, including **PATH** and **TERM**.

The variable **TMOUT** is useful when your system
supports dialup lines. Set it to a number _N_ , and if a user
doesn't enter a command within _N_ seconds after the shell
last issued a prompt, the shell will terminate. This feature
is helpful in preventing people from "hogging" the dialup
lines.

You may want to include some more complex
customizations involving environment variables, such as
the prompt string **PS1** containing the current directory (as
seen inChapter 4).


You can also turn on options, such as _emacs_ or _vi_ editing
modes, or **noclobber** to protect against inadvertent file
overwriting. Any shell scripts you have written for
general use also contribute to customization.

Unfortunately, it's not possible to create a global alias.
You can define aliases in _/etc/profile_ , but there is no way
to make them part of the environment so that their
definitions will propagate to subshells. (In contrast, users
can define global aliases by putting their definitions in
_~/.bashrc_ .)

However, you can set up global functions. These are an
excellent way to customize your system's environment,
because functions are part of the shell, not separate
processes.

[8]If you are comfortable with Boolean logic, think of the

**umask** as a number that the operating system logically
ANDs with the permission given by the creating process.

[10]The "hard" and "soft" arguments are not available in

_bash_ prior to version 2.05a.


# System Security

# Features

UNIX security is a problem of legendary notoriety. Just
about every aspect of a UNIX system has some security
issue associated with it, and it's usually the system
administrator's job to worry about this issue.

_bash_ has two features that help solve this problem: the
_restricted shell_ , which is intentionally "brain damaged,"
and _privileged mode_ , which is used with shell scripts that
run as if the user were **root**.

## Restricted Shell

The restricted shell is designed to put the user into an
environment where her ability to move around and write
files is severely limited. It's usually used for "guest"
accounts.[11]You can make a user's login shell restricted
by putting **rbash** in the user's _/etc/passwd_ entry.[12]

The specific constraints imposed by the restricted shell
disallow the user from doing the following:

- Changing working directories: **cd** is inoperative.
    If you try to use it, you will get the error message
    **bash: cd: restricted**.


- Redirecting output to a file: the redirectors **>** , **>|** ,
    **<>** , and **>>** are not allowed.
- Assigning a new value to the environment
    variables **ENV** , **BASH_ENV** , **SHELL** , or
    **PATH**.
- Specifying any commands with slashes (/) in
    them. The shell will treat files outside of the
    current directory as "not found."
- Using the **exec** built-in.
- Specifying a filename containing a **/** as an
    argument to the. built-in command.
- Importing function definitions from the shell
    environment at startup.
- Adding or deleting built-in commands with the **-f**
    and **-d** options to the **enable** built-in command.
- Specifying the **-p** option to the **builtin** command.
- Turning off restricted mode with **set +r**.

These restrictions go into effect after the user's
_.bash_profile_ and environment files are run. In addition, it
is wise to change the owner of the users' _.bash_profile_
and _.bashrc_ to root, and make these files read-only. The
users' home directory should also be made read-only.


This means that the restricted shell user's entire
environment is set up in _/etc/profile_ and _.bash_profile_.
Since the user can't access _/etc/profile_ and can't overwrite
_.bash_profile_ , this lets the system administrator configure
the environment as he sees fit.

Two common ways of setting up such environments are
to set up a directory of "safe" commands and have that
directory be the only one in **PATH** , and to set up a
command menu from which the user can't escape without
exiting the shell.


## A System Break-In Scenario

Before we explain the other security features, here is
some background information on system security that
should help you understand why they are necessary.

Many problems with UNIX security hinge on a UNIX file
attribute called the _suid_ (set user ID) bit. This is like a
permission bit (see **umask** earlier in this chapter): when
an executable file has it turned on, the file runs with an
effective user ID equal to the owner of the file, which is
usually **root**. The effective user ID is distinct from the
real user ID of the process.

This feature lets administrators write scripts that do
certain things that require **root** privilege (e.g., configure
printers) in a controlled way. To set a file's _suid_ bit, the
superuser can type **chmod 4755** _filename_ ; the **4** is the
_suid_ bit.

Modern system administration wisdom says that creating
_suid_ shell scripts is a very, very bad idea.[13]This has
been especially true under the C shell, because its _.cshrc_
environment file introduces numerous opportunities for
break-ins. _bash_ 's environment file feature creates similar
security holes, although the security feature we'll see
shortly make this problem less severe.


We'll show why it's dangerous to set a script's _suid_ bit.
Recall that inChapter 3, we mentioned that it's not a good
idea to put your personal _bin_ directory at the front of your
**PATH**. Here is a scenario that shows how this placement
combines with _suid_ shell scripts to form a security hole: a
variation of the infamous "Trojan horse" scheme. First,
the computer cracker has to find a user on the system
with an _suid_ shell script. In addition, the user must have a
**PATH** with her personal _bin_ directory listed before the
public _bin_ directories, and the cracker must have write
permission on the user's personal _bin_ directory.

Once the cracker finds a user with these requirements, he
follows these steps:

- Looks at the _suid_ script and finds a common
    utility that it calls. Let's say it's grep.
- Creates the Trojan horse, which is this case is a
    shell script called grep in the user's personal bin
    directory. The script looks like this:

```
cp /bin/bash filename
chown root
filename
chmod 4755
filename
/bin/grep "$@
rm ~/bin/grep
```
```
filename should be some unremarkable filename
in a directory with public read and execute
permission, such as /bin or /usr/bin. The file,
```

```
when created, will be that most heinous of
security holes: an suid interactive shell.
```
- Sits back and waits for the user to run the suid
    shell script—which calls the Trojan horse, which
    in turn creates the suid shell and then
    self-destructs.
- Runs the _suid_ shell and creates havoc.


## Privileged Mode

The one way to protect against Trojan horses is _privileged
mode_. This is a **set -o** option ( **set -o privileged** or **set -p** ).

In privileged mode, when an _suid bash_ shell script is
invoked, the shell does not run the user's environment
file—i.e., it doesn't expand the user's **BASH_ENV**
environment variable.

Since privileged mode is an option, it is possible to turn it
off with the command **set +o privileged** (or **set +p** ). But
this doesn't help the potential system cracker: the shell
automatically changes its effective user ID to be the same
as the real user ID—i.e., if you turn off privileged mode,
you also turn off _suid_.

Privileged mode is an excellent security feature; it solves
a problem that originated when the environment file idea
first appeared in the C shell.

Nevertheless, we still strongly recommend against
creating _suid_ shell scripts. We have shown how _bash_
protects against break-ins in one particular situation, but
that certainly does not imply that _bash_ is "safe" in any
absolute sense. If you really must have _suid_ scripts, you
should carefully consider all relevant security issues.


Finally, if you would like to learn more about UNIX
security, we recommend _Practical UNIX and Internet
Security_ , by Gene Spafford and Simson Garfinkel
(O'Reilly ).

[11]This feature is not documented in the manual pages

for old versions of _bash_.

[12]If this option has been included when the shell was

compiled. SeeChapter 11for details on configuring _bash_.

[13]In fact, most versions of UNIX intentionally disable

the _suid_ feature for shell scripts.

