# Chapter 11. Shell

# Scripting

For the majority of this book, we've looked at the various
elements that make up _bash_ and how you can use them in
writing shell scripts. If you've used other programming
languages you will know that there is a difference
between writing a piece of code that gets a job done and
writing a piece of code that does the job but is also
maintainable and conforms to what we could call "good
practice."

This chapter will give a brief introduction to some aspects
of good practice and writing maintainable shell scripts
along with helpful tips and tricks that you can use to
make writing scripts easier.

# What's That Do?

Six months ago you coded up a 100 line shell script. It
made perfect sense then, but now you look at it and
wonder, "Just what does that do?" This is a common
pitfall among programmers—especially those writing in a
shell language. Unfortunately, shells have developed with
more than their fair share of obscure punctuation. This is
a blessing for keeping typing to a minimum but doesn't


help readability. It's important to make your code as
readable as possible.

## Comments

The first rule of shell scripting is to _comment your code_.
You should do this right from the start, even if the script
is only a couple of lines long. Shell scripts have a habit of
growing from a couple of lines to many hundreds of lines
as more features are added, so it's best to get into the
habit of commenting your code right at the beginning.

To start with, consider having a main header or banner
for your scripts. The information in the header should, at
a minimum, say what the script does. Here is an example
of a script header:

```
#!/bin/bash
#####################################################
# Name: graphconv.sh
#
# Converts graphics files from one format to another.
#
# Usage: graphconv.sh <input-file> <output-file>
#
# Author: C. Newham
# Date: 2004/12/02
#####################################################
```
This main header gives the name of the script, a brief
summary of what it does, usage information, the name of
the author, and when the script was written.


If you are using a source control system (e.g., CVS), you
can dispense with the author and date as these will be
stored when the script is archived. If you aren't using such
a system, we strongly advise that you not only include the
above information but also place in the header additional
data such as modification dates and authors.

Whatever system you use, make sure that you make the
format of the banner a standard across all of your scripts.

Every function should also have a header. If it is a
standalone function, it should have a main header, as
given above. If it is a function used locally in a script, it
should have a simpler banner stating what it does, what
parameters it expects, and what it returns, e.g.:

```
# Changes the filename extension
#
# param: $infile - the original filename
#
# returns: the modified name with new extension.
#
function change_filename( )
...
```
Comments should also be used frequently in your code to
say what the code is doing. While we aren't about to
dictate style, comments within the flow of the code are
generally better on a line by themselves, while variable
declaration comments are better on the same line as the
variable:

```
startup_dir=/home/startup/ # directory with startup files
file_limit=50 # maximum number of files to process
```

...
if [ -d "$startup_dir" ]
then
# the startup directory exists so read any initialisation file.
echo "initialising file processing..."


## Variables and Constants

Headers and comments are just one way to document
your code. Another is by the use of descriptive variable
names. Good variable names should give an indication of
what the variable represents. Names like "x", "resn" or
"procd" will only have meaning at the time that you write
the script. Six months down the track and they will be a
mystery.

Good names should be short but descriptive. The three
examples above might have been more meaningfully
written as "file_limit", "resolution", and "was_processed".
Don't make the names too long; the name
"horizontal_resolution_of_the_picture" just clutters a
script and takes away any advantage in making the name
so descriptive.

Constants should be in uppercase and should normally be
declared as read-only:

```
declare -r CAPITAL_OF_ENGLAND="London"
```
You should always avoid "magic numbers" sprinkled
throughout the code by using constants. For example:

```
if [[ $process_result == 68 ]]
...
```
should be replaced with:


```
declare -ir STAGE_3_FAILURE=68
...
if [[ $process_result == $STAGE_3_FAILURE ]]
...
```
Not only does this make the code more readable but it
makes changing the value easier, especially if it is used
numerous times in the script.


# Starting Up

In Chapter 6 we talked about using **getopts** to obtain
options and arguments passed in to a shell script. This
command makes it easy for the script programmer to
process what the user has provided, but what about the
other half of the deal? The programmer must make an
effort to make life as easy for the user as possible.
Nothing makes a user more irate than a script that doesn't
take standard arguments, doesn't provide a usage
message, doesn't process the arguments in the expected
way, and forces the user into a way of thinking that the
programmer thinks is the right way. Having to examine
the source code for a script to find out what is an
acceptable argument or option is usually the last straw!

The Free Software Foundation has published a set of
guidelines for writing GNU software that suggests
standard ways in which UNIX utilities should operate.[1]
When writing your own shell scripts, it is worthwhile to
follow the guidelines because your script will then look
familiar to users who have used other command-line
programs.

At a minimum your script should provide single letter
options (such as - _h_ ) and long options with the double
dash (such as — _help_ ). It should also provide two options _:
—help_ and _—version_. From the GNU manual:


**_—version_**

```
This option should direct the program to print
information about its name, version, origin, and legal
status, all on standard output, and then exit
successfully. Other options and arguments should be
ignored once this is seen, and the program should not
perform its normal function.
```
**_—help_**

```
This option should output brief documentation for
how to invoke the program, on standard output, then
exit successfully. Other options and arguments
should be ignored once this is seen, and the program
should not perform its normal function.
```
```
Near the end of the —help option's output there
should be a line that says where to mail bug reports.
It should have this format:
```
- Report bugs to _mailing-address_.

```
Table 11-1lists a few of the common single-letter
and long options that you may consider using for
your own scripts. This list is by no means exhaustive
and is intended merely for guidance.
```
**Table 11-1. Possible options**


**Long option Option Examples where used**

—all -a
_du_ , _ls_ , _nm_ , _stty_ , _uname_ ,
_unexpand_

—append -a etags, tee, time

—binary -b cpio, diff

—blocks -b head, tail

—date -d touch

—directory -d cpio

—exclude-from -X tar

—file -f fgrep

—help -h man


**Long option Option Examples where used**

—long -l ls

—line -l wc

—links -L cpio, ls

—output -o cc, sort

—quiet -q who

—recursive -r rm

—recursive -R ls

—silent -s Synonym for -quiet

—unique -u _sort_


```
Long option Option Examples where used
```
```
—verbose -v cpio, tar
```
```
—width -w pr, sdiff
```
For commands that take one or more input files and
produce an output file it is considered good practice to
make only the input files normal arguments (i.e _.,
command filename_ ) and have the output file specified by
an option (i.e., _command -o filename_ ).

Another thing to watch out for is assuming that a
particular environment variable needed by your script has
been set in the users' environment. If your script is relying
on the user to have set an environment variable, it is
probably better to redesign your script to allow the value
to be passed in as an argument.

[1]The document is available at _[http://www.gnu.org/prep/](http://www.gnu.org/prep/)_

_standards/_.


# Potential Problems

Here are some useful things to watch out for when
writing shell scripts. Being aware of them will not only
save you time in tracking down bugs but will also make
your scripts more robust, more readable, and above all,
more maintainable.

- Don't create massive scripts or functions that try
    to do everything. Split functionality up into
    smaller units and place them in functions. This
    not only makes the code easier to read but makes
    it easier to debug.
- Always place the shell execution directive (e.g.,
    _#!/bin/bash_ ) at the top of your scripts to ensure
    they will be run by _bash_.
- Don't use reserved words for variable names.
    This can become very confusing:

```
let let="echo"
let echo="hello"
echo "$echo world"
```
- Be careful with whitespace. Attempting the
    following assignment will not give the expected
    result:

```
cat = 5
```

- Don't use the same names for variables and
    functions:

```
function letter
{
echo $1etter
}
letter=letter
letter letter
```
```
This causes more confusion that it's worth. While
this example is contrived, be on your guard for
more subtle examples. To guard against this, try
and name your functions using verbs, e.g.,
function print_letter.
```
- Be careful when using the test operator **[** ... **]**. The
    following two **if** statements are not the same,
    although they look very similar:

```
if [ "$var" = 42 ]
if [ "$var" -eq 42 ]
```
```
The first is a string comparison, the second an
integer comparison. We suggest using (( ... )) for
arithmetic comparisons in if statements.
```

# Don't Use bash

Sometimes you might start writing a script and after
several hours of work find that you've created a monster
with many hundreds of lines of complicated code. This is
not always a bad thing, but it is a good idea to always be
thinking about whether the job could be done in a better
way.

Usually the choice of programming language should take
place at the design stage. If you are starting from scratch
on a Unix system you will have many options, including
C and C++, _perl_ , _python_ , and a host of others. They all
have their advantages and disadvantages, and no one
language will be the best solution for every problem.

If you find that your script has a huge amount of
processing to do quickly or if the script requires
mathematical capabilities beyond simple integer
arithmetic, it might be worthwhile considering C or C++
for the job. If you are looking for better portability across
systems, _python_ or _perl_ might be a better match to the
task.

However, even if _bash_ is not suitable in the final solution
to a problem, you might find it makes an excellent
language for mocking up your solution and trying out
various options.

